# 00 - Crash Course Geology Preview.txt
Video ID: YokkwzdZX2A
Lang: en
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YokkwzdZX2A

---

I dare you to find somebody who hasn't,
at some point in their life, uttered the
words, "Ooh, cool rock." Those three
little words connect you to powerful
forces that shape the world. People who
lived thousands of years ago and the
squirmy little kid inside you who never
grew up. Because let's face it, rocks
are cool. We've transported them across
long distances as far back as
prehistoric times. We've admired them,
traded them, built pyramids and
skyscrapers out of them. And to this
day, even a tiny pebble is part of a
bigger story that began long before us
and will continue on long after we're
gone. Hi, I'm Sage and this is Crash
Course Geology. I'm an artist and a
creator who is obsessed with Earth
science. You might know me from my
YouTube channel, Sage the Bad
Naturalist, where I make videos about
fascinating fungi and scary sludge and
various experiments that never go
exactly to plan. And I love a cool rock.
But geology is so much more than that.
In 25 episodes, we'll dig deep into the
forces that shape our planet from the
inside out. We'll dial back the clock to
Earth's fiery youth, journey into its
center, and uncover the churning dynamic
forces that sculpted its surface, making
it possible for you and me to exist at
all. We'll discover how fossils and
layers of rock clue us into what
happened before humans showed up,
fashionably late to the party. And
Dwayne the pet rock will catch us up on
all the lore we missed. Huh?
What's that?
Girl, Earth did what now? But geology
isn't just about the deep past. It's
also about the present and the future.
It's about the gems that decorate our
fingers and the minerals that power
electric cars. It's about clean water,
healthy soil, and preparing for hazards
like earthquakes and volcanic eruptions.
It's about tapping Earth's geothermal
energy and finding rocks to store excess
carbon. Geology puts our lives in a
whole new perspective, cuz it's not just
microscopic minerals and enormous
mountains. It's asteroids and deep-sea
trenches and worlds beyond our own. One
tiny ordinary pebble can teach us about
our current moment and the enormous time
scales that stretch beyond us. So, meet
me back here to check out some cool
rocks and much more together. Thanks for
watching this episode Crash Course
Geology. It was filmed at our studio in
Indianapolis, Indiana, which is made
with the help of these groovy people. If
you want to help us keep Crash Course
free for everyone forever, you can join
our community on Patreon.