# 01 - Intro to Geology.txt
Video ID: ypH6dR7YGfU
Lang: en
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ypH6dR7YGfU

---

Hi, I'm Sage and this
is Earth. Explosive volcanoes oozing red
hot lava, gargantuan gorges carved
millions of years ago by rushing rivers,
and earthquakes that trigger 100-foot
waves. Our planet is massive, but it's
also
tiny. It's a [music] sparkling gemstone
that can fit in your hand. Grains of
sand that travel across the wind. The
scale is truly mind-blowing. So, don't
let anyone tell you geology is just a
bunch of rocks, okay? This is Dwayne,
the pet rock, and this is Crash Course
Geology.
&gt;&gt; [music]
&gt;&gt; Rocks rock.
I hate puns. So, what is geology,
exactly?
Broadly, it's the study of the Earth.
But, that can mean a lot of different
things, and it has. Let's go back in
time for a sec. Long before geology
became its own field of study,
indigenous peoples gathered a wealth of
knowledge about the Earth. Havasupai
oral tradition describes a river carving
the Grand Canyon, which it did. And
there's a site in Arizona with
fossilized Dilophosaurus tracks that the
Diné, or Navajo, traditionally called a
place with bird tracks way before we
knew birds were descended from dinos.
For many native cultures, then and now,
the Earth and its elements are part of
an interconnected system that we humans
are a part of. Check out Crash Course
Native American History to learn more.
Across the world, early scientists and
scholars wanted to understand the world
around them. Persian scientist Ibn Sina
noticed that layers of rock build up
with the youngest rocks on top, an
essential observation for dating
specific rocks. In the same century,
Chinese thinker Shen Kuo figured out
that moving water shapes the land
through erosion, and inferred from
fossils that Earth's climate has changed
over time. Take another trip across the
globe, and you'll find the folks who
usually get all the credit for
developing geology as a science,
Europeans. There was a 16th century
German scientist Georgius Agricola,
so-called the father of mineralogy, who
observed that rocks appear in layers and
that earthquakes and volcanoes might
have something to do with Earth's molten
guts, like kimchi has everything to do
with mine. And then there were the 18th
century naturalists James Hutton and
Georges Cuvier, who had opposing
theories about geological activity.
James was like, "Earth's geological
processes work the same today as they
have forever." And George was like,
"There is geological processes are
caused by major catastrophes." They were
both kind of right, but we'll get to the
dirt on that drama in a later episode.
Wait, I thought we weren't doing any
more puns. Unfortunately, a lot of the
geologic knowledge acquired in this era
was a result of combing stolen land for
resources that could be exploited for
profit. And indigenous and enslaved
peoples' perspective and contributions
to European colonizers' research went
largely unacknowledged. Rather than
recognize the interconnectedness of
different aspects of geology, early
Western geologists largely explored
questions about the Earth without
considering the relationships between
those phenomena. But in the 1960s, a
different theory became widely accepted
that really shook things up. I'm talking
about the theory of plate tectonics, the
idea that massive plates make up the
Earth's outer layer and slip and slide
and smash together, building mountains
and making and breaking continents.
Because of these plates, Earth's got a
surface that flexes.
Hit with the flex, Dwayne.
And Earth's the only planet we know with
active tectonic plates, a quality some
geologists think is essential for life.
With the discovery of plate tectonics,
geologists finally recognized the Earth
as one big interconnected system.
Kind of like the indigenous people were
saying all along.
So, the definition of geology has
changed over time. And humans have been
interested in it since we could pick up
rocks and be like, "Hey, cool rock." But
why? What's geology got to do with us?
Well, if we operate under the assumption
that Earth is one big interconnected
system, then we are a part of it. Not
just in jewelry stores or museum gift
shops, talking about the minerals in
your toothpaste, the smartphone in your
pocket, and the building you live in.
All products of geology, and that's just
on a small scale. Geology also shapes
the places you live, like through
people's settlement patterns, or the
places they formed and maintained
communities. Let's dig a little deeper.
Behold the East Coast of the United
States. We've got plains here and rocky
terrain here. And this guy in the
middle, that's called the fall line.
Connects a string of major cities like a
big connect the dot. Millions of years
ago, this was the Atlantic coastline.
But over time, the Appalachian Mountains
eroded, and all that worn-away rock or
sediment was carried out by rivers out
here, forming [music] the coastal plain.
If you were on a boat traveling upstream
from the Atlantic just a few hundred
years ago, you'd get [music] stuck at
this fall line. You'd hit fast-moving
rapids, waterfalls, you know, things you
shouldn't go chasing.
&gt;&gt; [music]
&gt;&gt; If you wanted to trade stuff, you'd have
to dock your boat and haul your wares on
land until the water was calm again.
[music] Indigenous people knew this, but
European colonists just had to figure it
out the hard way for themselves. As they
struggled to get further inland, [music]
a place to set up camp. So, at the fall
line, that point where they couldn't
travel any further [music] upstream,
settlers built pitstops. And those
pitstops became towns, which eventually
grew into cities like Philadelphia,
Baltimore, Washington D.C., later home
to a variety of avian mascots. [music] I
still don't know what Gritty is, though.
And today, if you ever drive down I-95,
you'll be right on that fall line,
traveling the boundary no boat could
ever cross. These kinds of geological
considerations have affected where
people live throughout history. Like,
humans have always loved building
civilizations on river plains with
nutrient-rich soil. I see you,
Mesopotamia, with the good dirt. Geology
not only affects where you live, but
also what it's like to live there,
including the weather. Like, the Andes
Mountains of South America are so tall,
they create the world's driest desert on
one side, and keep the Amazon rainforest
lush on the other. Geological features
even influence the hazards of living in
a certain area like flooding,
landslides, earthquakes, and tsunamis.
So, yeah. Geology is way more than
rocks. And we need folks to study all of
this like geochemists who examine the
chemicals that the Earth cycles between
the land, water, and sky. Oceanographers
who study geological processes under the
sea. Paleontologists who dig up old dead
stuff. And planetary scientists who
explore the geology of other worlds.
Although, sometimes geology is all about
rocks. Don't worry, we didn't forget
about you sedimentologists. You won't
find geologists in just one place,
either. They're all over the planet at
universities, research labs, government
agencies, and companies focused on
energy, mining, and the environment.
Somewhere out there, there's a geologist
who identified the minerals in the
laptop you use. A geologist who monitors
your water making sure it's safe to
drink.
There's even a geologist protecting you
from Earth's powerful blasts and shakes.
And despite geology's complicated
history, today's indigenous geologists
are making waves in the field. They're
combining traditional knowledge with
western science to bring new insights
and better shape our policies for doing
geological work on tribal lands like
Shalianne Chavarría, a member of the
Pueblo of Santa Clara, who works to
incorporate Pueblo teachings and culture
into the US Geological Survey.
Geologists often work like detectives to
piece together the truth about Earth's
past and present using clues in today's
rocks.
Hey, Roll man. My office polished to a
luster [music] with a stone called
Swagger of a boulder 12 times his size.
Somehow,
I knew he had a story to tell.
Where were you 50,000 years ago?
But he just wasn't talking.
Geologists can help us answer big
questions like how did life form? Can we
reduce the risks of earthquakes and
volcanic eruptions? What will happen to
the Earth as its climate warms and how
can we manage its natural resources
sustainably? It might even help us
figure out how the Grand Canyon got
here, cuz
we don't totally know. Wait. I could
just ask you.
What's that?
We know a
Can tell them?
Us against rock on our code. No, I
understand.
As far as we know, Earth is a
one-of-a-kind, and we humans get to
experience it all. It's mountains,
volcanoes, glaciers, and hoodoos, which
they seem like they shouldn't exist, but
absolutely do. Look at that thing.
Geology, and Earth itself, is too big to
just be one thing. It involves fossils,
water, oil, and weather. It reveals
processes that have been chugging along
for billions of years, dramatically
transforming our planet over time, all
while we bop around playing video games
and doing our nightly skin care
routines. Geology touches your everyday
life, and if you let it, it'll give you
a brand new perspective on the world.
There's so much more to learn. I can't
wait to hit rock bottom together. Oh,
that one didn't even make sense. Next
time, we'll look back at Earth's past
and discover what it was really like in
its toddler years. See you then. Thanks
for watching this episode of Crash
Course Geology, which we filmed at our
studio in Indianapolis, Indiana, which
was made with the help of all these dope
people. If you want to help keep Crash
Course free for everyone, forever, you
can join our community on Patreon.