# 02 - How did Earth form.txt
Video ID: 3JdpD3X2Md8
Lang: en
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3JdpD3X2Md8

---

How did one of Earth's oldest rocks end
up on the moon? In 2019, scientists
discovered something amazing inside a
moon rock. A tiny, embedded, 2-cm chip.
Just a little clump of rock, right? But
the scientists figured out that that
tiny chip was around 4 billion years old
and contained minerals like quartz,
feldspar, and zircon crystals in forms
that can only be found on Earth.
So, what happened? And what can that
tell us about our planet? Hi, I'm Sage.
This is Crash Course Geology.
Rocks on Earth and in space hold a lot
of clues about our planet's beginnings.
And if you haven't already noticed,
Earth is pretty special.
As far as we know, it's the only planet
that sustains life. What can I say?
We're kind of a big deal. So, knowing
how Earth came to be is also a big deal
for understanding its past and its
future. Everybody loves a good origin
story. But, it's tricky because there
isn't much physical evidence left from
Earth's formation. See, forces like
weather and plate tectonics cause
Earth's materials to constantly move and
change. So, as far as we know, all of
the rocks that were around when Earth
was born just don't exist anymore. But,
a lot of physics research has led to
some compelling theories about how we
went from nothing to a pretty special
something. This is Earth's birth story,
or our best guess at it. Sometime around
4.6 billion years ago, our solar system
was a swirling cloud of gas and dust.
Then something, maybe a nearby exploding
star called a supernova, made that
swirling cloud collapse into a solar
nebula, a spinning condensed disk that
eventually formed the solar system we
now know and love. First, gravity pulled
together most of the stuff swirling in
that cloud, causing nuclear fusion
between the hydrogen and the helium,
which created our sun. Then, what was
left spread out into a slowly rotating
disc like a spinning record, what's
called a protoplanetary disc. The stuff
in that disc started to clump and smash
together, break apart, collide again,
and create new objects. The largest of
these planetesimals became baby planets,
or protoplanets. Then, once their
gravity pulled all the matter in the
surrounding area toward them, they
finally got big enough to be considered
bonafide planets. But, that doesn't mean
our solar system immediately looked the
way it does today. It still had a lot of
growing up to do. During Earth's toddler
stage, it was less pale blue dot and
more fiery hellscape, lasting for
hundreds of millions of years. This
period is known as the Hadean Eon, after
the Greek god Hades, who ruled the
underworld. How's that for terrible
twos? Things did eventually start to
cool down, but the surface wasn't
exactly quiet. The end of the Hadean was
the start of a pretty violent period for
our planet, known as the Late Heavy
Bombardment, when Earth was pummeled by
asteroids. What's that, Dwayne?
Uh, yeah, that would make me cranky,
too. And this era might explain how rock
from Earth ended up on the moon. The
moon was closer to the Earth in those
days, so an asteroid impact could have
ejected chunks of Earth all the way out
to our lunar buddy. And since there's a
lot less weather and geological activity
on the moon, a rock could have stayed
relatively undisturbed for literal ages.
If that's what happened, then our little
mystery rock can offer us a clue into
what was happening on Earth at that
time. Its mineral mixture hints that
continents were already starting to form
4 billion years ago. And there's other
evidence of early continents in 4.4
billion-year-old zircons found in
Australia. They even hint at the
existence of early oceans. So, asteroid
impacts might be the reason why we found
an Earth rock on the moon, but what
about the moon itself? How did it become
our planet's
BFF?
Like with the Earth, we're not exactly
sure, but we do have some pretty good
theories. The most widely accepted one
is known as the giant impact theory. The
story goes that back when Earth was just
a wee protoplanet, it collided with
another protoplanet known as Theia. The
collision created a bunch of space
debris in Earth's orbit, which
eventually came together to become the
Earth's moon. But there are other
theories, too. Like that some material
broke off of Earth and began to orbit
the planet as a separate body. Or that
the Earth and the moon formed at the
same time. Or maybe the moon formed
somewhere else, moved toward the Earth
and was captured by its gravity. We know
that the last one, known as capture
theory, is possible because it happened
with other objects. Like in 2024, Earth
had a mini moon for 2 months. An
asteroid had fallen towards Earth and
was temporarily pulled into its orbit.
The moon was like, "No big deal. Earth
can have other friends. I don't care."
But these theories don't explain
everything. Like Earth and the moon have
very similar isotopic signatures,
combinations of atoms that act like
fingerprints or a genetic code.
But if the moon was a separate body that
formed elsewhere in the solar system,
its isotopes would be way different from
Earth's.
And if the moon simply broke away from
Earth or formed from the same material,
they should be even more similar.
So, what do we do with that? Let's learn
about a different theory with one of my
geology rockstars. In Sarah Stewart's
lab, planetary geologist shot cannons at
rocks, recreated the conditions of
planetary formation, and used computer
models to simulate planetary collisions.
They tried different speeds, different
sizes to replicate the moon's formation.
But in every scenario, the Earth and the
moon didn't wind up with that shared
genetic code. One day, Stewart and her
team had a realization. Sometimes a
planet stops being a planet.
When two giant celestial objects
collide, their surfaces get partially
vaporized, which means that proto-Earth
could have gotten so hot playing bumper
cars and spun out so fast from the
impact, it turned into a donut-shaped
mass of rock and vapor. As Stewart put
it in her 2019 TED Talk, "I discovered a
new type of astronomical object." She
called it a synestia. Syn, Greek for
together, and estia, after Hestia, the
Greek goddess of the hearth and home,
and older sister of fiery Hades.
Eventually, a synestia cools and turns
back into a planet.
Stewart thinks that when Earth was a
synestia, the moon may have formed
inside it. Then it orbited there for
years before Earth began to cool and
shrink, dividing the synestia into two
separate bodies with nearly identical
isotopes. She finally developed a theory
that could explain everything. Well,
almost everything.
A more recent computer simulation
suggests another version of giant impact
theory.
Earth's moon formed within a few hours
of the collision between Earth and
Theia.
So, some scientists think there's still
more to the story. Fun fact, as a kid, I
once sent a fan email to a NASA
astronaut who was on a TV special about
how the moon formed. Um, shout out
Michelle Fowler for the very kind
response and also for being smart and
cool. Okay, so we've got some pretty
decent ideas for how Earth and the moon
formed. But, how did we get from
asteroid-pummeled planet to
life-sustaining paradise? I got two
words for you, H2O, baby. Water didn't
just appear one day out of the blue.
Wait, what? That might be exactly what
happened? I mean, okay, space.
Give me that chaotic energy, I guess.
According to some scientists, a space
object containing water happened to
collide with Earth like a cosmic water
balloon, and voila, blue planet was
born. We know that might be possible
because the Ryugu and Bennu asteroids
orbiting in our solar system have shown
evidence of the same type of water that
exists in Earth's oceans. So, it's
possible that asteroids are responsible
for bringing water to the planet. Or
there may have been water on Earth
before any asteroid strikes. Like our
mystery moon rock and those 4.4
billion-year-old Australian zircons show
evidence of water in their isotopes,
which means that there was liquid water
on Earth's surface soon after the
planet's birth. And one 2023 study
suggests that once Earth cooled, it
always had water thanks to hydrogen
present in the protoplanetary disk that
formed it. Any of these theories could
be correct, or maybe all of them are.
But Earth's water has stuck around
because of one thing, its atmosphere.
Without it, any liquid water on the
surface would have evaporated into
space. So, where did it come from?
Remember all those volcanoes on that hot
baby Earth? One theory is that volcanic
eruptions released gases like carbon
dioxide and methane, which made up
Earth's early atmosphere.
Those volcanoes could have also released
nitrogen and water vapor, which built up
in it. Then, as Earth cooled, the water
vapor condensed forming the oceans.
Eventually, early plants started
performing photosynthesis and releasing
oxygen gas. That kind of important
molecule that us breathe. And tada, a
grown-up Earth ready to take on the
universe.
I'm so proud. We may not have a crystal
clear understanding of how our planet
formed. That baby photo album is still a
work in progress. But if finding an
Earth rock on the moon is any
indication, there are still a lot of
clues out there just waiting for us to
discover them. When you think about it,
the fact that we got here is pretty
amazing. After all, Earth could still be
a raging, erupting toddler. Next time,
we'll journey below Earth's surface.
See you then. Thanks for watching this
episode of Crash Course Geology, which
was filmed in our studio in
Indianapolis, Indiana, which was made
with the help of all these dope people.
If you want to help keep Crash Course
free for everyone forever, you can join
our community on Patreon.