# 03 - Earths Crust and Mantle Explained.txt
Video ID: bouvNyq8xCY
Lang: en
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bouvNyq8xCY

---

Are you ready for this? I don't think
you're ready for this. This is the
deepest hole ever dug.
I swear it's under there. It's called
the Kola Superdeep Borehole. You can
find it in the frigid ground on the
northwest tip of Russia. And if you fell
in, which is unlikely since the opening
is only about 23 cm wide, you'd plummet
12.2 km before hitting the bottom.
That's deep. The wild part? This hole
barely scratches the surface. It doesn't
even go through the top layer of the
Earth. So, what really lies beneath us?
Hi, I'm Sage. This is Crash Course
Geology.
We humans have been wondering about
Earth's insides for a really long time.
In the 17th century, Edmond Halley of
Halley's Comet fame proposed the Earth
was a hollow shell holding a smaller
sphere like a gargantuan Kinder Egg. In
1864, author Jules Verne imagined a
world within our world full of oceans
and prehistoric life forms. And in 1928,
Arthur Conan Doyle envisioned a sea
urchin-like planet with sentient squishy
guts fighting people back when people
drilled into it. Dwayne here is very
glad they were all wrong. Though the
Kinder Egg one would be pretty neat,
huh? Earth's crust, our planet's outer
rocky shell, is the layer we know best.
It's where we live after all. But it
takes up just 1.4% of Earth's total
volume. We've never journeyed beyond it,
but not for lack of trying. In fact,
before Kola Superdeep Borehole, there
was Project Mohole. Let's dig a little
deeper. In the late 1950s, a ragtag gang
of scientists known as the American
Miscellaneous Society hatched an
ambitious plan: drill all the way
through the Earth's crust. Why? Cuz
nobody had before. The group dubbed
their plan Project Mohole after the
Mohorovicic discontinuity, or the
boundary between Earth's crust and
mantle.
And in 1961, the team boarded a ship
called and I can't believe I'm saying
this,
Cuss what?
On board, journalist John Steinbeck,
yep, the
the Grapes of Wrath guy, compared it to
an outhouse standing on a garbage scow.
Here's the thing about trying something
nobody has tried yet. Nobody knows how.
Team Mohole needed to figure out not
only how to drill through kilometers of
rock, but also how to get that drill to
the bottom of the ocean where the
Earth's crust was thinnest. It was not
going to be easy
or cheap. So, they started small. They
picked a spot off the coast of Mexico
and drilled a few hundred feet. And
eureka! They dredged up cores of rock
and sediment from the seabed,
discovering volcanic rock nobody knew
was there.
Steinbeck wrote that everyone aboard had
a frantic interest. So much so that the
scientists had trouble working around
the crowd. And back on land, US
President John F. Kennedy praised the
team's remarkable achievement. But then
came bureaucracy and bickering. Team
Mohole disagreed about the next steps.
Should they continue with small tests in
shallow holes or go big, crust or bust?
One geologist warned that the project
would be either one of the most
rewarding scientific ventures ever
carried out or a foolish and
unjustifiably expensive fiasco. Turns
it was neither. Money ran out. Project
Mohole faded away. The dreamers and
schemers behind Project Mohole didn't
reach the big goal of drilling all the
way through the Earth's crust. To this
day, nobody has. Though, folks are still
trying. Including my pal Dwayne. Grab
your shovel, buddy. We're digging
through the center of the Earth.
We're starting here at the crust.
It's got all the fossils and fuel ever
buried, all the sewer pipes, the
basements, and doomsday bunkers ever
built, all the Incredibles ever made.
Which reminds me,
I'm going to let you watch you.
Going own. You don't have to share. The
crust is made of solid rocky slabs,
mostly composed of oxygen and silicon,
along with other elements like aluminum,
iron, and calcium.
These slabs, known as tectonic plates,
slam into, slide against, and pull apart
from one another over time, forming
continents, mountains, and trenches up
top.
The crust is thickest under mountains,
where it can be around 70 km deep, about
the distance between Times Square and
the middle of Long Island, New York.
But oceanic crust forms differently and
is much thinner than continental crust.
It's typically only 5 to 10 km thick.
You could basically do a fun run from
top to bottom. As we keep digging, we'd
eventually make it to the mantle,
Earth's dense middle layer. It generates
convection currents, which help drive
the churn of tectonic plates and
recycling of rocks from the surface. The
Earth's mantle is thick with two Cs. It
makes up roughly 84% of the Earth's
volume, with a depth of about 2,900 km.
That's about the distance between Times
Square and the middle of Colorado. What
we've covered so far, from the surface
to about 100 km down, is called the
lithosphere. It's the solid, rocky,
relatively cool part of the Earth, which
includes the crust and the uppermost
part of the mantle. But then, we'd enter
the asthenosphere, the swath of the
mantle where it's so hot and the
pressure is so high, the rocks become
stretchy.
The mantle is mostly made of rocks rich
in iron and magnesium.
As heat and pressure increase, the rocks
get loosey-goosey, ooey-gooey even. The
deeper we go, the more the rocks have
the texture of taffy. For the first 410
km or so, we'd be in the upper mantle.
Notice how it's greenish-black.
That color comes from a sparkling
mineral called olivine.
But the colors would start changing as
we moved into the mantle transition
zone, an area of increasing temperature
and pressure that causes the chemical
composition to shift.
The deeper you go, the hotter and more
densely packed the minerals are. And
some can't take the pressure.
Their atoms
rearrange to become completely different
minerals, changing color to black, red,
and blue.
Just as we'd hit the base of this
transition zone, around 660 km down,
we'd find some veiled terrain, a
subterranean mountain range with jagged
crags that no one has ever climbed, some
of which might even be taller than
Everest.
Past the mountains, we'd enter the even
hotter, denser lower mantle, which
stretches from 660 km to about 2700 km
below Earth's surface. Here, because of
the high pressure, the rocks flow less
than they do in the upper mantle. And
the lower mantle is big.
It accounts for about half of Earth's
total volume. But then, what's that
strange blobs the size of continents?
What are they? We don't know yet. Maybe
they're leftovers from an ancient
collision with another planet, or
they're bits of tectonic plates that
have broken off. For now, scientists
have nicknamed them Tuzo and Jason. I
love geologists and their strange naming
conventions. After that slight detour,
we'd arrive at the core, Earth's
extremely hot, extremely dense center.
We'll talk about that in our next
episode.
There you have it. Earth's three layers:
crust, mantle, and core. Like one giant
peanut M&amp;M. Even with powerful drilling
equipment, researchers still haven't
been able to get past the crust. So, you
might be wondering,
how do we even know this stuff? Well,
geologists have figured out ways to
study Earth's deep interior by finding
clues on the surface. They can learn
about the mantle's composition through
volcanic eruptions that spit out melted
mantle rock or rip out hunks of it. And
they get by with a little help from
space, too, from iron meteorites, very
old space rocks that likely formed the
core of ancient worlds. Geologists know
Earth's core is made of the same metals,
which sank to the planet's center as it
formed. And in 2014, a 4.5
billion-year-old meteorite made it
possible for geologists to observe, for
the first time, the most abundant
mineral inside Earth, bridgmanite, which
scientists think makes up much of
Earth's superheated lower mantle.
Geologists also study deep Earth
seismology, a field that analyzes
seismic waves from earthquakes and other
vibrations within the Earth.
From seismic wave measurements,
geologists can take x-rays of the Earth,
piecing together properties of its
layers. And even though we still haven't
made it to the mantle, Project Mohole
and the Kola Superdeep Borehole weren't
failures. They kicked off techniques
that later scientists used to discover
more about Earth's insides and past.
Drilling and dredging up samples from
the ocean floor has since brought
insight to the Earth's climate millions
of years ago and shaped our knowledge of
how the tectonic plates sculpt the
landscape over time, among many other
discoveries. More on that in future
episodes. There's still so much to learn
from the inner Earth, including how it
connects to us. In 2023, a team on a
ship called the JOIDES Resolution
drilled about 850 m below the ocean
surface and pulled up chunks of mantle
from an underwater mountain where the
crust is especially thin. They observed
how those rocks' sparkling green olivine
reacted with the ocean's water to create
the hydrogen required to form organic
compounds, life's basic ingredients.
Those mantle rocks could offer clues to
how life began billions of years ago. To
this day, nobody has actually journeyed
to the center of the Earth
or even below the crust for that matter.
By many measures,
we know less about our own planet's
insides than about the solar system
outside it. But geologists have found
ways to work around these challenges,
building on early drilling techniques
and refining new methods for studying
the Earth's depths. There's so much more
to discover about the world beneath our
feet and how it shapes our lives up
here. Next time, we'll put a spotlight
on Earth's magnetic MVP, the core.
See you then. Thanks for watching this
episode of Crash Course Geology, which
is filmed in our studio in Indianapolis,
Indiana, which was made with the help of
all these dope people. If you want to
help keep Crash Course free for everyone
forever, you can join our community on
Patreon.