# 04 - Whats at the center of the earth.txt
Video ID: rm46SdVfB4I
Lang: en
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rm46SdVfB4I

---

It was the spring [music] of 1967 and
the Cold War was underway. The US was on
high alert for attacks coming from the
Soviet Union and on May 23rd, the radio
communications suddenly jammed. Did the
USSR bug the system? Was this an act of
war? A fleet of US [music] Air Force
bombers was poised to launch a
counterattack, an act that might have
sparked nuclear war.
But just in time, vital information was
relayed by an unlikely [music] group.
Weather forecasters?
&gt;&gt; Hi, I'm Sage. This is CrashCourse
Geology.
&gt;&gt; [music]
&gt;&gt; No, you didn't accidentally click on a
CrashCourse US History video. To
understand what really happened during
the Cold War, we've got to dig deep, all
the way to the Earth's core, the hot,
dense center of the planet. Last time we
learned about the Earth's top two
layers, the tough crust and the
taffy-like mantle. But for a long time,
we could only imagine what was at the
center of this big blue marble. Back in
1692, Edmond Halley was the first to
describe Earth's core as something
separate and disconnected from its
shell. He described an internal
structure known as the hollow Earth
model where a series of hollow spheres
rotated around a central core. He argued
that both Earth's shell and core had
something called a magnetic field, each
with two poles or points of attraction
and repulsion. Think of the magnets on
your fridge.
The same forces that draw a magnet to
the fridge and push two magnets apart
make up a magnetic field. But Halley
wasn't quite right. He based his theory
on Newton's calculations of the density
of the Earth and the moon, which were
off. Look, Newton basically invented
physics. It's okay for him to take an L
once in a while. Hundreds of years
later, scientists developed the field of
seismology to study Earth's insides.
Tracking seismic waves within the Earth
helped British geologist Richard Oldham
find the first evidence of Earth's core
in 1906 and led British physicist Harold
Jeffreys to suggest that the core might
be liquid 20 years later. It took
another decade to discover what was
really at the heart of our home planet.
Thanks to one of my geology rock stars.
Hey, did Dwayne?
When Inge Lehmann was growing up in late
19th century Denmark, most people didn't
expect much of girls, but that didn't
hold her back. As a kid, Lehmann
attended a progressive co-ed school in
Copenhagen.
But she didn't find the same egalitarian
attitudes when she studied math at the
University of Cambridge in England.
Women could attend lectures, but they
couldn't officially enroll or use labs
or libraries. And while she eventually
finished her math degree in Denmark,
what she really was interested in was
earthquakes. In the late 1920s and 30s,
Lehmann filled index cards with
information about earthquakes from all
over the world, looking them over in her
garden, storing them in empty oatmeal
boxes for reference. While she was
studying a large earthquake that had
occurred off the coast of New Zealand,
she noticed that some of its seismic
waves had acted
&gt;&gt; [music]
&gt;&gt; weird. They seemed to travel into the
Earth's core before bouncing off of some
kind of hard boundary. That didn't fit
with the dominant idea of a gooey liquid
core.
So in 1936, Lehmann published a paper
theorizing that the Earth's center
consisted of two parts, a liquid outer
core surrounding a solid inner core.
Lehmann passed away in 1993 at the age
of 104, living long enough to see her
theory about the Earth's core become
widely accepted [music] scientific
consensus. Lehmann solved one huge
mystery, but there's still so much to
learn about Earth's core.
Further seismological research confirmed
the makeup of that inner core, iron and
nickel. But a 2025 study of seismic
waves showed that the core may be
changing shape and even changing the
direction and speed of its rotation.
There's also evidence that the inner
core isn't completely solid, but sort of
squishy. And there may even be another
layer, creatively named the innermost
inner core. Like, come on on,
Dwayne could do better than that. Wait,
no. No shade, Dwayne. Okay, so the core
of our planet is a hot ball of iron and
nickel, but it isn't just like chilling
there. That ball of metal basically
functions as Earth's bodyguard, using
invisible armor to protect us, a
magnetic field. The hot metal in the
core's molten outer layer is constantly
in motion, creating currents that
generate a magnetic field surrounding
the Earth.
That field has two poles, north and
south.
Not to be confused with the geographic
north and south poles. No penguins or
Santa Claus here. Like in any other
magnet, the magnetic field moves in a
continuous loop, entering Earth at the
north magnetic pole and leaving from the
south magnetic pole. In space, the
influence of Earth's magnetic field
extends tens of thousands of kilometers
around the planet, creating a bubble
known as the Earth's magnetosphere. The
magnetosphere is constantly moving and
changing as it repels and traps charged
particles from the sun and the rest of
space, protecting Earth from radiation.
The sun is constantly pushing energy
into space in a flow of electrically
charged plasma called solar wind. That
solar wind helped shape our
magnetosphere, compressing it on the
sun-facing side [music] and stretching
it out in a tail behind the shaded side,
so that it wraps around the Earth.
Without that magnetic field, the Earth
wouldn't exist at all
because it would be Mars.
Let me explain. Billions of years ago,
the red planet may have had oceans, a
thicker atmosphere, and its own magnetic
field, but over time, Mars lost that
magnetic field. And without it, solar
wind and radiation stripped the planet
of its atmosphere.
No atmosphere, no water. Its oceans that
may have once made it habitable were
gone. If Earth's core didn't produce a
magnetic field, we'd be in the same
boat. So, Earth's magnetosphere is
pretty essential. But no matter how
tough our planet's bodyguard is, it's
not indestructible. In some cases, solar
energy can cut through the core's
defenses, especially when it's really
volatile. See, the sun's own magnetic
field can get tangled up as it rotates,
stretching and snapping, and then
releasing energy in the form of solar
storms. [music]
These could be massive explosions of
light called solar flares, ejections of
charged particles called radiation
storms, or eruptions of plasma called
coronal mass [music] ejections. And
these storms can cause major problems.
Like in 1859, English astronomer Richard
Carrington witnessed the biggest solar
storm on record, a massive solar [music]
flare followed by a series of coronal
mass ejections, though he didn't know
what they were at the time. The next
day, the world was in chaos. Telegraph
[music] systems sparked, started fires,
and wouldn't send messages. The northern
lights were suddenly visible as far
south as Hawaii.
And they were so bright in the
northeastern US, people said they could
read the newspaper in the middle of the
night. [music] They thought the world
was ending, and you can't really blame
them. But what actually happened was a
geomagnetic storm.
The solar storm's particles had
disturbed the Earth's magnetosphere, and
that disturbance interfered with
technological and electrical systems
across the world, which brings us back
to our Cold War mystery. That radio
outage that spooked the US? You guessed
it. The culprit was really a geomagnetic
storm, not an active war. Thankfully,
the US Air Force's team of space weather
forecasters informed the military
leaders of increased solar activity
before any fighter jets took off.
History could have played out very
differently. As for the world today,
geomagnetic storms continue to happen
once in a while. They can warm up the
Earth's atmosphere, which increases drag
on satellites, causing power outages and
interrupting radio communication, GPS
signals, airplanes, and spacecraft. Mass
interruptions to internet connections,
cell phones, and electricity can have
huge consequences to just about
everything that powers our modern lives.
That can all feel like a lot to worry
about, but the good news is we're not
doomed, even if some movies make us
think we are. Like you might have heard
that the Earth's magnetic field can
change over time. Its poles can shift or
even completely reverse, and that's
true.
In the last 250 million years, Earth's
magnetic poles have reversed hundreds of
times. The last time they did was about
780,000 years ago. So, it's probably
time for another one.
Movies and TV shows might have you
worrying that a pole reversal would
cause global destruction leading us to a
Mars-like future and a terrifying alien
invasion.
But magnetic pole reversal won't just
happen overnight. Mathematical models
suggest it could take thousands of
years. And if it does, we might not even
notice many changes. According to fossil
records, sediment samples, and ice
cores, previous magnetic field reversals
haven't caused any major changes to
Earth's climate or had a visible impact
on life. It could affect the way
migrating animals like sea turtles and
birds navigate, but since that change
would happen slowly, those animals would
likely be able to adapt over time. The
most that would happen might just be
backwards compasses and confusing maps.
Does that mean North Dakota would become
South Dakota?
So, it turns out it's kind of risky to
live on a planet floating 93 million
miles from a giant ball of fiery gas.
But lucky for us, Earth's core provides
us with the most powerful invisible
armor imaginable. And while that armor
can shift and change, that doesn't spell
the end of the world, though it can
wreak havoc from time to time. For now,
space meteorologists are watching the
skies for us and learning more every
day. Next time, we'll learn all about
minerals.
See you then. Thanks for watching this
episode of Crash Course Geology, which
was filmed in our studio in
Indianapolis, Indiana and was made with
the help of all these nice people. If
you want to help keep Crash Course free
for everyone forever, you can join our
community on Patreon.
&gt;&gt; [bell]