# 05 - How Do Minerals Form.txt
Video ID: jQvv7CskMuo
Lang: en
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jQvv7CskMuo

---

For centuries, it was worth its weight
in gold. People built cities to trade
it. They fought wars over it. And to
this day, you and I and every animal on
Earth literally can't live without it.
I'm talking about this, salt. Every
grain you've ever eaten comes from this,
a mineral called halite that forms from
the evaporation of salt water. But salt
isn't the only mineral with a story. And
in more ways than you might realize, the
story of minerals connects to you. Hi,
I'm Sage and this is Crash Course
Geology.
Minerals are heroes. They make life
itself possible. Some stink, some glow
under a black light, some are magnetic,
others poisonous, and some keep the
shredded cheese in my fridge from
clumping together. One of their more
important responsibilities. But what
exactly are they?
Well, hold on to your bustamite. I'm
about to say a lot of words. A mineral
is an inorganic material with a solid
crystalline structure and a specific
chemical composition formed by
geological processes. An inorganic
material is not made from the carbon
molecules associated with living things.
Solid means it's neither liquid nor gas.
Crystalline means the atoms are arranged
in one of six orderly patterns called
crystal systems. Having a specific
chemical composition means it can be
described with a particular recipe of
chemical elements. And formed by
geological processes means it's cooked
up in nature. There are a lot of
minerals out there, over 6,000 that we
know of. Some are extremely rare, found
only in strange or inaccessible corners
of the Earth. And I bet some
are even in your house right now. Like
natrolite, which you might know is
baking soda.
Or ice, which you might know as ice. I
know, right? Ice is a mineral. But some
things are mineral posers. Like opal and
pearl might seem like minerals, but they
don't check off all the qualities in the
definition. Or let me show you some
other examples. Mineral oil has mineral
in the name, but
it's liquid. Rock candy is crystalline,
but it's organic and not formed in
nature. And glass isn't a mineral,
either. I got to put this back in the
cupboard.
And we all know a rock when we kick one,
but rock has a specific definition in
geology speak. It's a solid made of one
or more minerals and smooshed together.
Like Dwayne here, he's granite, a mix of
mostly quartz and feldspar. He's also a
reminder of the vastness of geologic
time and my own human frailty,
which I contend with by putting googly
eyes on him.
So, we've got some seriously cool
minerals on this planet. And there are a
few main ways that they form. One is
when magma, molten rock under Earth's
surface, or lava, molten rock that
breaks through the surface, cools down
and crystallizes. Another is when rock
is heated and compressed so much its
minerals transform into other minerals.
That also happens to me when I'm stuck
on a hot, crowded bus and then I
transform into sweaty sage. Living
things can even build minerals in their
bones and shells. Like one of the main
materials in your teeth and bones is the
mineral hydroxyapatite. And then you've
got another classic way minerals form,
when water evaporates or cools down,
creating solid crystals. That's how salt
happens. It's also how filmy white gunk
ends up on your faucet in your bathroom.
That's mostly calcium carbonate. Some
minerals just need a couple of weeks of
neglecting a bathroom cleaning schedule
to form, while others take a super long
time with bonkers results. Like check
out these gypsum crystals the size of
trees found in Chihuahua, Mexico. It
likely took nearly a million years to
form just one of these babies in this
hot cave once full of water. That's your
cousin? I don't know, I see the
resemblance. And luckily, you don't need
to go a hundreds of feet below the Earth
to get up close and personal with cool
minerals. They're all over the planet.
And mineralogists, geologists who
specialize in minerals, identify them by
their chemical composition and physical
properties. But sometimes, this takes
quite a bit of investigation.
Some minerals are tricksters, con men,
tough to identify.
My wide whale
is apatite, from the Greek word meaning
to deceive.
And deceive it does.
On the other hand, some minerals have
special properties that can help reveal
their identity. Like alexandrite shines
emerald green in the sun, but ruby red
under incandescent light. Sulfur can
smell like a burning match when heated
up, or take on a rotten egg stank from
reactions with moisture. Calcite and
dolomite fizz when they touch
hydrochloric acid. And sylvite has a
salty, bitter, metallic taste. So, if
you ever see a grown adult licking
rocks, they're probably just a
geologist, hopefully. Usually though,
there's not just one thing that gives
away a mineral's identity. Geologists
have to examine a bunch of different
physical properties to figure out what
minerals a rock is made of. Let's check
out some cool minerals. The first
property I notice is luster, how light
interacts with the surface. Some
minerals are shiny and metallic-looking,
like this pyrite. But others reflect
very little light at all, like
kaolinite. This fluoride here has a
glass-like luster. It's also got a
lovely pale color, although it can glow
brightly under black light. Sometimes
color is a huge tell, like malachite is
always shades of green, and azurite is
usually deep blue. But most of the time,
color alone won't tell you much. Like
quartz and fluorite are sometimes the
exact same shade of purple, and
depending on the trace elements it
contains, quartz can also be yellow,
pink, or blue. So, we've also got to
look at the streak, the color of the
powder left behind when the mineral's
scratched against a ceramic plate. Like
hematite creates a rusty brown powder.
And despite its reddish color, this
pyrite leaves behind a greenish-black
streak. But some minerals don't leave a
streak at all.
That's because minerals vary in their
hardness, how resistant they are to
being scratched. Geologists use the Mohs
hardness scale to assign minerals a
hardness between 1 and 10. Talc is a 1,
so soft you can scratch it with your
fingernail.
Diamond is a 10, so hard the only thing
that can scratch it is another diamond.
If you were to scratch this fluorite, a
penny wouldn't leave a mark, but a
pocketknife would. So, I'd guess it
would be around a four on the Mohs
scale. Another property to check for is
cleavage, meaning how minerals break in
smooth, flat planes along weak atomic
bonds within their crystal structure.
Some minerals break in parallel lines,
others in multiple directions. But some,
like quartz and olivine, don't break in
a clean fashion. This muscovite
breaks into thin sheets or flakes. Up
next, density. That's hard to measure in
a precise way, so geologists often rely
on a related property, specific gravity.
That's the ratio of the mineral's mass
to an equal volume of water. Geologists
figure this out by suspending mineral
samples in water and taking
measurements. We don't have time for
that right now, so I'm going to rely on
the advanced technique of picking it up
and feeling how heavy it is.
Science. Last but not least, you can
tell minerals apart by their crystal
habit, or the appearance of a crystal or
cluster of crystals. There are some wild
shapes out there. Cubes, blobs, blades,
branches, even crystals that grow like
sheets or rose petals. This chalcedony
has a botryoidal crystal habit, which is
what makes it look like a bunch of
grapes. And there you have it.
Everything you need to know about that
cool rock you just found. Minerals are
all around us, from the cool rock you
pick up outside to the salt in your
pantry. But minerals are also a big deal
for life itself. In the early universe,
there were only about 12 minerals
around, which formed in the wake of
exploding stars. When our solar system
burst into existence, that number grew
to about 250 types of minerals. And
Earth's baby years sparked the formation
of over a thousand more, thanks to
weathering, the movement of water, the
churning and cooling of magma, and the
pressure from colliding tectonic plates.
And when life made its debut billions of
years ago, mineral diversity exploded.
The earliest forms of life released
oxygen into the atmosphere, triggering
chemical reactions that created
thousands of new minerals. Some living
things began making minerals themselves,
like we talked about earlier. Minerals
created soil as bits of weathered rock
mixed with decaying critters, supporting
plants, land animals, and the formation
of even more kinds of minerals. It was
this amazing feedback loop that created
a metaphorical gold mine. As far as we
know, Earth is the only place life has
ever formed. And if it weren't for
minerals, life as we know it wouldn't
exist. But also, if it weren't for life,
minerals as we know them wouldn't exist.
It's estimated there are 10 times more
minerals on Earth than anywhere else in
the solar system.
And life
might be one of the reasons why.
Minerals are everywhere, and their past
is linked to our own. Some minerals are
the size of telephone poles. Others are
too tiny to see with the naked eye. Some
dazzle with their rarity, others we
encounter every day. Some have been part
of the human story for thousands of
years, and some have been around longer
than life itself. Still others are
lurking in the depths and corners of the
Earth waiting to be discovered. Next
time, we'll ask the question, where do
rocks come from?
I'll give you a hint. Uh, it's when two
or more minerals love each other very
much. Well,
kind of.
See you then. Thanks for watching this
episode of Crash Course Geology, which
was filmed in our studio in
Indianapolis, Indiana, and was made with
the help of all these cool people. If
you want to help keep Crash Course free
for everyone, forever, you can join our
community on Patreon.