# 06 - The Rock Episode.txt
Video ID: lT_QAkL6lj0
Lang: en
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lT_QAkL6lj0

---

In the wilds of Chile, there are
mountains that look like Oreos? [music]
These are Los Cuernos del Paine. Their
unusual appearance draws thousands of
visitors every year. With a thick light
stripe between [music] two dark layers,
they out here looking like a snack. But
besides looking cool, they actually have
a lot to teach us about geology, star
subject. That's right. It's the rock
episode. Hit it, Dwayne.
Hi, I'm Sage and this is Crash Course
Geology.
&gt;&gt; [music]
&gt;&gt; Los Cuernos are amazing not just for
their unique visual features, but
because they showcase every part of the
rock cycle.
Listen, Dwayne, if you do that every
time I say rock in this episode, we'll
be here a while. Just turn it Just turn
it down a little bit, pal. The rock
cycle is a process that recycles Earth's
raw materials over time.
The rock cycle makes it possible for any
kind of rock to transform into another
kind of rock. It's one of the forces
that continuously freshen up Earth's
surface. It's the reason why when you
hold a rock in your hand, you're not
holding something that's frozen in time
forever. A rock's current identity isn't
what it once was or what it'll be in the
future. But first,
what really is a rock?
Stonehenge,
the Blarney Stone,
Emma Stone. Since the dawn of time,
rocks have held many meanings for many
peo- What?
We don't have that much time.
What am I supposed to do with these?
&gt;&gt; [music]
&gt;&gt; As I was saying, in geology, the word
rock has a specific meaning, a solid
cluster of one or more minerals.
Minerals, by the way, are solid crystals
with a specific chemical composition
formed by geological processes. Dwayne,
one of us is going to have to change.
Uh, stubborn as a rock.
I think a rock's kind of like dogs. You
have your purebreds, like quartzite,
which is mostly just the mineral quartz.
Then you got your mutts, which are a mix
of different minerals. Like Dwayne is
granite, which is mostly quartz,
feldspar, and mica, but can also have a
lot of other minerals like hornblende,
zircon, and magnetite. But even the rock
mutts still fall into three basic types,
classified by how they formed within the
rock cycle. Sedimentary, like this super
sandstone, igneous, like this beautiful
basalt, and metamorphic, like
this nice, well, nice. All three of
these rock types were involved in the
formation of Los Cuernos. Let's start at
the bottom. Rock bottom, am I right? I
think I just have to accept the puns at
this point. This is sedimentary rock,
which is created when bits of rock and
minerals, called sediment, pile up and
solidify into a solid mass. About 90
million years ago, before these
mountains were mountains, the oldest
rocks formed from tiny grains of mud and
sand at the bottom of an ancient sea.
Over time, this sediment was buried and
squeezed like a geological panini until
it formed a solid mass. Like, imagine if
all the stuff at the bottom of your
lockers slowly fused together over the
school year. Paper clips, clarinet
reeds, emo sweaters, all combining into
a single locker rock. It's sort of like
that, but on a much longer time scale.
The sedimentary rocks at Los Cuernos are
clastic. They formed from bits of other
rocks that broke off, drifted away, and
got compacted deep underground over
time. If you wanted to get fancy, and I
always do, you've got to know that
there's more than one way to make a
sedimentary rock. And I've got examples
of all of them in my pockets. It's cool
rock time. All right, Dwayne, it's your
time to shine.
This is limestone. Get a load of that
puppy. It's a sedimentary rock that
forms biochemically, meaning from the
shells and bones of once living
organisms. Cool, right? This one, you
know it, you love it, you eat it. It's
rock salt. It's a sedimentary rock that
forms chemically from dissolved minerals
that separate from water. Finally,
this lump of coal is a sedimentary rock
that forms organically from the
compressed tissues of once living
things. Can you believe this rock is
made of leaf goo? Like, how is our
planet a real place? Let's turn it over
to igneous rock, by far the most common
rock type on Earth's surface. What's
that, Edwin?
Sure, I guess classic rock is pretty
common, too.
What? No, Blink-182 is not classic rock.
I'm not going through this again with
you. Sorry about that. Anyway, igneous
rock forms when molten rock cools down
and crystallizes into a solid.
Geologists give molten rock different
names depending on where it's hanging
out.
Magma is when it's underground, and lava
is when it's above ground. Remember that
thick light stripe on Los Cuernos? We
can thank igneous rock for that. Around
12.5 million years ago, three pulses of
magma pumped out of Earth's depths and
slid in between the sedimentary rock
layers that now make up much of the
mountain. As the magma cooled over time,
it formed a special type of igneous
formation called a laccolith. It's
giving belt of lava volcano. Look at
those spicy lava eyes. The igneous rock
at Los Cuernos is intrusive. That means
it formed from magma that rose up and
cooled very slowly inside other rocks
below Earth's surface. It intruded, if
you will. But some igneous rocks, like
basalt and
this pumice here, form in a way that's
extrusive. They're created when magma
exits up to the Earth's surface,
becoming lava, where it cools and
hardens into rock. Our last stop on the
tour of Los Cuernos is metamorphic rock,
which forms when intense temperature,
pressure, hot fluids, or a combo of
these causes one kind of rock to
transform into a different kind of rock.
In other words, a metamorphosis happens.
Like a beautiful rock butterfly. A
rock-a-fly. A butter-rock. You get it.
At Los Cuernos, when the magma intruded
into the mountain, it oozed between
layers of sedimentary rock.
As it did so, the magma's heat baked the
rock it touched, causing it to change
identity.
Those rocks became metamorphic.
Sometimes metamorphic rock takes on a
foliated or stripy appearance. Nice,
like the one I have here. Has visible
streaks because intense pressure
flattened and rearranged its mineral
crystals into even bands. But in Los
Cuernos, the metamorphic rocks are
non-foliated. That's because the rocks
weren't squished by extreme pressure,
only warped by intense heat. So, the
crystals never got pushed into stripes.
Los Cuernos is so cool, but these
mountains show us just one of the ways
the rock cycle can play out. Many
different factors can cause rocks to bop
back and forth in the rock cycle,
changing identities over time. Igneous
rock can become sedimentary, then
metamorphic, then back to igneous, or
sedimentary again. Rocks go through more
phases than me in middle school. Just
look at Dwayne. His journey started
underground millions of years ago when
magma collected in a bleb under Earth's
surface, slowly cooling to form our
igneous buddy. Over many years, tectonic
shifts pushed the land and Dwayne
upward.
As the land rose, other slow but mighty
forces freed Dwayne from his rocky
prison, weathering and erosion. You see,
elements like water, wind, and ice act
as hammers, sculpting rocks by breaking
them down in a process called
weathering. This can also happen through
chemical processes. Like, rain is
slightly acidic, so raindrops can spark
chemical reactions as they land on
rocks, transforming the minerals within
them. And even living things can cause
weathering. Trees weather rocks by
creating cracks with their roots. People
cause weathering by walking all over the
same patch of rocks for years. Even
tiny, unassuming lichen weather rocks by
oozing acids from their root-like
structures. We have got to change the
game to rock, paper, scissors, wind,
water, lichen. Weathering creates
sediment, the stuff that eventually
forms sedimentary rock. And then comes
erosion, the process that washes away
sediment and moves it somewhere else.
Those two processes explain how Dwayne
broke off from his home cliff and
tumbled down to where I was hiking when
I was like, "Hey, cool rock." And the
rest is history. So, yeah. Nothing stays
the same forever. The rock cycle is
happening all around us all the time.
When you pick up a rock, you're touching
something that's part of the same cycle
that formed the Rainbow Mountains in
China, the Giant's Causeway in Northern
Ireland, and The Wave in Arizona. Which,
honestly, looks like something out of a
Dr. Seuss book. No matter where you
live, the rock cycle shapes the land
around [music] you. Understanding how
rocks form and transform can give you a
whole new perspective on the planet we
all call home. Next time, we're taking a
magnifying glass to gems. See you then.
All right, Dwayne, let's go. Rock,
paper, scissors, wind, water, lichen.
Oh, wait, you don't have hands. Thanks
for watching this episode of Crash
Course Geology, which was filmed at our
studio in Indianapolis, Indiana, made
with the help of all these super cool
people. If you want to help keep Crash
Course free for everyone forever, you
can join our community on Patreon.