# 07 - How Do Gems Form.txt
Video ID: eKnl_Jp8jsg
Lang: en
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eKnl_Jp8jsg

---

Let's go to ancient Egypt. This is the
Egyptian pharaoh Tutankhamun, aka King
Tut. And this was found inside his tomb.
It's an ornate breastplate, and the
pièce de résistance is that gemstone in
the middle. It depicts the god Ra as a
beetle. But what kind of gem is it? And
how did it form? For decades after the
tomb's discovery in 1922, no geologist
could find a solid answer. But now, we
have one. That gem formed because of a
rock from space.
Hi, I'm Sage, and this is CrashCourse
Geology.
They sparkle, they shine, and sometimes
they're found in a literal treasure
trove. I'm talking about gems. We value
these stones for their distinctive
qualities. They're hard to break, hard
to find, and simply beautiful. And they
can be made of a bunch of different
stuff. Most often, they're composed of
minerals, those inorganic materials that
make up things like quartz, ruby, and
garnet. Minerals have a specific
crystalline structure. They're made of
atoms that are arranged in an orderly
repeating pattern. So, that makes all
minerals crystals. And when a crystal is
valued specifically for its durability,
rarity, and beauty, we call it a gem.
No, Dwayne, you're not a gemstone.
Mhm. Yes, I still love you just the way
you are. But gems can also be made of
other stuff, including organic materials
that come from living creatures, like a
pearl from an oyster or a petrified wood
from a tree. It all depends on what we
deem valuable. Because of those
qualities, people have been entranced by
gems for a long, long time, coveting
them, wearing them, attributing powers
and curses to them, stealing them from
palaces, graves, and renowned Parisian
museums. Like people across the globe
have treasured opals for centuries. Some
indigenous Australians believe that they
were left behind in the footprints of
the creator who rode to Earth on a
rainbow. So, maybe it's no surprise
we've always wondered where they came
from in the first place. Or that Taylor
Swift named a song after them.
Technically, the song is opalite and
opalite is man-made. This This was This
was a whole thing in the writer's room.
There was Swifty on Swifty violence. We
don't have time for it right now. We
curious humans have been studying gems
for thousands of years trying to figure
out why and how they form. Like, way
back in the 70s CE, Roman philosopher
Pliny the Elder was the gemstone expert.
Some of his ideas were right, but he did
say that you could only break a diamond
by hammering it with a tool that had
been soaked in goat's blood, so yeah.
Grain of salt.
But for a long time, that research was
mostly guesswork. It took new
technologies for us to find the answers
we were searching for. Let's
dig a little deeper.
After the discovery of King Tut's tomb,
it took another decade for someone to
discover a similar gem in nature.
British surveyor Patrick Clayton found a
bunch of yellow-green stones in a part
of the Sahara called the Great Sand Sea,
along the border of Egypt and Libya. He
assumed it was a type of quartz. Later,
the gem became known as Libyan Desert
Glass. Geologists had a wide range of
wild theories about the glass's origins,
from lightning strikes to lunar
volcanoes. As technology advanced,
scientists have slowly teased out some
clues. For one, researchers estimated
that the Libyan Desert Glass was about
28 million years old. They uncovered
evidence of its high-pressure and
high-temperature beginnings. So hot that
some of the minerals within the glass,
like the dark streaks of cristobalite,
couldn't have possibly formed from
ordinary happenings on Earth. They found
chemical traces that suggest bits of
iron from within the gem weren't from
our planet. Essentially, the gem likely
formed from meteorites slamming into
desert sand, causing the sand to melt
and recrystallize, along with those
mysterious dark streaks. Put another
way, the very same gem that was buried
with an Egyptian king likely came from
Earth tangoing with a space rock.
But the mystery hasn't been completely
solved. Some researchers think that the
meteorite didn't actually hit Earth's
surface, but rather broke apart in a
low-altitude explosion above it. Though
there's still much to learn, it's safe
to say that we know a lot more about
gems than we used to. Gemologists,
scientists who study gems, use the Mohs
hardness scale to measure a gem's
hardness or resistance to scratching.
They also study gems' toughness or
resistance to chipping or fracturing and
their stability or resistance to heat,
chemicals, and light that can cause a
gem's color to fade. Side note, you
might have heard gems described as
semi-precious or precious supposedly
based on their rarity. But don't let
those words fool you. There are so many
exceptions to the rule, those labels are
basically meaningless. Like diamonds are
considered precious gems, but depending
on the type, they could be worth less
than supposedly semi-precious garnet.
Aside from color, we've also ironed out
some other qualities of gems, like
brilliance, luster, transparency, and
fire. Wow, Dwayne, you are dazzling. Did
you get some work done? Modern geology
has helped us learn a lot about where
gems come from. They can form in many
different ways, not just by meteoric
explosion or
your pet rock bedazzling itself. Some
gems come from lightning, like
fulgurite, which forms when lightning
strikes sand. And a lot of gemstones,
like emerald, aquamarine, and topaz,
form as molten rock cools super slowly
underground. Other gems form similarly
to how
rock candy is made, just with minerals
instead of sugar. Hot water circulates
through deep cracks in Earth's surface,
dissolving minerals as it flows. When
water eventually cools down, crystals
like quartz and fluorite can begin to
grow. Don't eat gems, though,
even when they look delicious. And if
crystals form in cavities underground,
you've got yourself a geode, a hunk of
rock lined with crystals on the inside.
When layers of rock above it eventually
wear away, that ball of crystals reaches
the surface. Then you can crack that
puppy open and see what sparkles inside.
No, no, no, don't worry. I wouldn't
crack you open. Also, So not a geode,
there's nothing in there. However, they
form, minerals all need the same basic
things. The right temperature, pressure,
time, space, and ingredients.
Lots of those ingredients are pretty
common chemical elements like silicon,
carbon, and oxygen. But sometimes, tiny
traces of other elements get in there.
Those impurities are often what
determine a gemstone's color, which can
sometimes change its name. Ruby and
sapphire, two paragons of gem high
society, are actually just different
colors of the same mineral, corundum.
Other weird stuff can happen to baby
gemstones, too. Like the different
colored bands in this watermelon
tourmaline formed when the environment
around the growing crystals shifted. Or
sometimes, different fluids or gases get
trapped in the crystal, creating
inclusions like the needle-thin hairs of
the mineral rutile that form the star in
this star ruby. Inclusions can also
offer us information about where the gem
formed geographically. For example, we
can tell certain emeralds come from
Colombia because of parasite inclusions
in them. It's a type of mineral, not
flesh-eating bug. The more we humans
learn about gems, more fascinated we
become. People today are just as into
them as old King Tut, maybe even more.
As of 2025, gemstones were a $36 billion
industry, and the value of individual
gems can really vary.
Often, gem sellers cut and polish them
for sale, creating flat surfaces called
facets that can enhance those beautiful
qualities like brilliance and fire. On
the other hand, inclusions can make gems
less valuable. Unless they're really
cool-looking like this rainbow lattice
sunstone. But as early as the 1870s,
scientists have tried to get around
those long, complex geological processes
by making their own gems. Imitation gems
known as simulants are made of materials
that only look like certain gems. Think
glass cut into the shape of a diamond,
or a hunk of granite covered in
rhinestones.
No, I said you look great. But we've
also harnessed science to grow gems that
are so much like the real thing that
they they kind of are. These synthetic
gems are grown in a lab by mimicking the
conditions in which gems grow in the
wild, but the lab is way more efficient.
In nature, rubies grow over millions of
years, but in the lab, they can grow in
as little as 3 hours. You also don't
have to dig them out of the ground,
which makes them a lot easier to come
by. People still prize natural gems, the
proof is in the price tag, but many are
turning to synthetics as a more
sustainable option. Processes that
create synthetic gems don't use or
degrade nearly as much land as natural
mining does, though they do require a
lot of energy. And gem mining can
sometimes coincide with human rights
abuses, like forced labor and
displacement of indigenous peoples.
These considerations are big and very
complex. We've shared some resources
below to dig deeper. As for how to tell
if a gem was made inside the earth or in
a lab, well, the average shopper
probably can't. High-end gem dealers
often send their wares to experts who
use tools like microscopes, UV lamps,
lasers, and X-rays to tell the
difference.
Whether we're coveting the sparkly
jewelry worn by celebs at the Met Gala
or perusing the crystal stand at the
farmers market, we humans are mesmerized
by gems. And that connects us to the
people of the past who saw just as much
beauty in them as we do today. As we
move into the future of the gem trade,
we'll have to ask ourselves even more
questions about what we value and why.
Next time, we'll talk about one very
special gem, diamonds. I'll uh
see you then.
Thanks for watching this episode of
Crash Course Geology, which was filmed
at our studio in Indianapolis, Indiana.
It was made with the help of these
rocking people. If you want to help keep
Crash Course free for everyone, forever,
you can join our community on Patreon.