# 08 - Where Do Diamonds Come From.txt
Video ID: AF2eYuAKsao
Lang: en
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AF2eYuAKsao

---

In the Smithsonian Museum of Natural
History lies a mysterious object. It's
drawn millions of visitors from across
the world. And not just for its beauty,
but for its curse. I'm talking about
this, the Hope Diamond, a gem taken from
India in the 1660s whose various owners
are rumored to have mysteriously died
from everything from wild dog attacks to
beheadings. Shh, it's okay, Dween. The
scary gem is safe in a museum. For now.
The Hope Diamond's curse might be a
myth. But one thing's for sure, it's not
the only myth out there about diamonds.
Hi, I'm Sage and this is CrashCourse
Geology.
Diamonds. They're bright, flawless, and
a girl's best friend. These aren't real,
by the way. What do you think rocks are
made of, money? But to a geologist,
diamonds are much more than a symbol of
glamour, timelessness, and love. And
there are a lot of misconceptions about
them, starting with their structure.
Diamond is a clear mineral made of one
main ingredient, carbon. Although
sometimes small amounts of other
elements can give them different color,
like that deep hue in the Hope Diamond
comes from boron. While carbon itself is
a pretty common element, diamonds do
something special with it. The carbon
atoms are puzzled together super tightly
into a crystal structure that's nearly
indestructible. In fact, diamond is the
hardest naturally occurring substance on
Earth. So hard we use it to cut through
concrete and stone. But how do you get a
structure like that? Spoiler alert, not
from coal. You've probably heard that
myth before, that diamonds are made of a
lump of coal and a lot of pressure. A
great motivational metaphor, but not a
scientifically accurate one. Sure, coal
is also made of carbon, but the way
diamonds actually form is way cooler
than squishing a rock.
Let's dig a little deeper. For hundreds
of years, humans didn't know where
diamonds came from. We could only find
them by searching riverbeds for washed
away sediment, also known as alluvial
mining.
But there was no way of knowing what
type of rock they came from.
Until 1870, when miners in South Africa
struck gold, or well, diamond. In the
town of Kimberly, they found tons of
diamond, not in the riverbed, but in the
ground.
It was the first time diamonds had ever
been found in the volcanic rock they
came from. The discoverers named the
source rock kimberlite after the [music]
town and started to study it. And after
a hundred odd years, we finally figured
out how those special stones got there.
It turns out diamonds form in cratons,
the deep down roots of continents.
They're stable, hot, and pressurized
enough to form carbon into that super
dense crystal structure that diamonds
are known for. Most diamonds form in
Earth's upper mantle, the part right
below the outer crust. But some
diamonds, like the Hope diamond,
&gt;&gt; [music]
&gt;&gt; form even deeper down, in the transition
zone in the lower mantle.
More than 600 km below the surface.
Maybe that's why the Hope diamond is
allegedly cursed. It's seen things no
one was ever meant to see. So, how do
they get to the surface? With a bang.
When continents [music] break apart,
they disrupt the mantle, leading to a
millions of years long domino effect.
Eventually, carbon dioxide and water
trapped within deep pockets of magma
explode into powerful kimberlite
eruptions. Molten rocks shoot upward,
blasting out carrot-shaped pipes through
the surface. And the violent flow rips
up chunks of deep rock [music] that, if
you're lucky, are studded with diamonds.
As for super deep diamonds like the
Hope, they have to rise a bit higher in
the mantle first, possibly by hitching a
ride on an extra hot rock that flows
from the lower mantle to the upper.
Then kimberlite eruptions can blast them
to the surface. Most kimberlite
eruptions happened between 250 and 50
million years ago, and their diamonds
started forming long before the blasts,
up to 3
billion years ago. Talk about classic
rock.
That one was so bad, it's good.
Which helps us see diamonds for what
they really are, time capsules of the
past.
They have a lot to teach us about the
super deep Earth and its super long
geologic history.
Mineral and fluid inclusions trapped in
diamond can give us clues about what the
mantle was like back when they formed,
which has helped geologists unravel all
kinds of geologic mysteries. Like Dr.
Kate Kaseyeva has examined garnet
inclusions in diamonds using advanced
scientific tools to get more information
about the composition of the deep
mantle. The last kimberlite eruption was
13 million years ago, and we don't know
if another will ever happen again.
So, while continue to grow deep
underground, we're left to mine the ones
that ancient eruptions have already
lofted into Earth's crust. They may have
given you the impression that diamonds
are super rare. After all, we humans
have prized them for centuries, and
there's only so many that are accessible
to us. But, diamonds' rarity is also a
myth, largely perpetuated by a
corporation.
We'll get to that in a sec. It's true
that we've valued diamonds for hundreds,
if not thousands, of years.
And at first, they were scarce enough
that only royalty and the extremely
wealthy owned them. Like, by 1668, the
Hope Diamond had reached the hands of
the French King Louis the 14th, who
would later die of gangrene.
Finding the kimberlite diamonds in South
Africa had huge effects.
For the next almost century, the African
continent produced 98%
of all the diamonds in the world. And
with so many diamonds flooding the
market, they weren't just for royalty
anymore. That's when British finance
bro, Cecil Rhodes, saw an opportunity.
He bought shares in a bunch of diamond
mines, and eventually controlled enough
of them to form the De Beers Mining
Company.
By 1887, the company owned
every diamond mine in South Africa.
For the next seven
decades, it controlled just about every
diamond mine in the world. De Beers used
its monopoly to keep up the illusion
that diamonds were scarce, a perception
that sold tons of overpriced diamonds.
By the 2000s, De Beers finally lost
their monopoly, but the myth that
diamonds are rare has stuck around.
Despite the fact that they're more
commonly found than lots of other gems.
Today, diamond value can be determined
by the four C's: color, clarity, cut,
and carat weight, which tell us what
diamond crystals look like, how they're
cut, and how big they are. For example,
the average diamond stud earring is
between .25 and 1 carat, which can
roughly range from a few hundred to a
few thousand dollars based on the type
of diamond. By comparison, the Hope
Diamond is a whopping 45.52
carats, which is why it's valued at up
to 350
million dollars. But those ordinary
diamond studs might not be made of
natural diamonds at all, which brings me
to our last myth. While many may think
that lab-grown diamonds are fake, they
are in fact very much real. See, in the
1940s, scientists at General Electric
started working on a way to skip the
whole billion-year mantle-to-mine
timeline and grow diamonds in the lab
instead. The effort was called Project
Superpressure. Coincidentally, that's
also what I called my all-night study
sessions in college. The scientists put
some graphite, which is also made of
carbon, under super-intense heat and
pressure.
And in just a few weeks, they had made
their own diamond.
In fact, it sort of worked the same way
many people think coal turns into
diamonds.
&gt;&gt; No, Dwayne, you're you're granite. You
You can't turn into a diamond. No, even
if I press on you really hard.
&gt;&gt; Within a couple decades, lab-grown
diamonds were just as hard, sparkly, and
impressive as the originals.
Modern processes use tiny fragments of
natural diamonds to seed new lab-grown
ones and work way more efficiently than
the old techniques. Lab-grown diamonds
are real diamonds. They just have a
slightly different origin story. Today,
lab-grown diamonds are more popular than
ever.
For one, they are way cheaper than
natural diamonds, costing up to 85% less
than their counterparts. Plus, many
people, myself very much included,
consider lab-grown diamonds a much more
ethical purchase. Diamond mines severely
damage the environment. The Big Hole
mine in Kimberley can literally be seen
from space and contributes to all sorts
of environmental problems from erosion
to water pollution. And importantly,
conditions in diamond mines can be
terribly dangerous for the miners
themselves. That's especially the case
in places with less social stability,
like parts of Central and West Africa,
where regional conflicts cut communities
off from their social and resource
networks.
In those places, small-scale mining
operations often use forced and child
labor and sell diamonds to fund violent
conflicts. We call those blood diamonds.
Even though international organizations
have tried to crack down on them,
they're still out there in the diamond
market. Now, that's a deeply complex
topic. So, check out the links below to
learn even more. Some folks still make a
case for natural diamonds, saying that
diamond mining can be good for local
economies in some of the world's poorest
countries, and that's less
environmentally harmful than other kinds
of mining. So, yeah,
there are lots of cultural, political,
and environmental factors at play when
choosing a lab-grown or natural diamond.
But geologically speaking,
they're one in the same. Whether grown
in a lab or blasted from the Earth's
mantle, diamonds are part of our world.
And they're not just nice to look at.
&gt;&gt; [music]
&gt;&gt; They're remnants of volcanic eruptions
that happened millions of years ago.
They unravel mysteries about deep
[music] Earth and deep time. They're so
hard, they beat rock in rock, paper,
scissors every time. And maybe they're
cursed.
At least the Hope Diamond. Ah, Dwayne.
Next time, we'll talk about force to be
reckoned with.
Water.
See you then. Thanks for watching this
episode of Crash Course Geology, which
was filmed at our studio in
Indianapolis, Indiana, was made with the
help of these glittering glorious
people. If you want to help keep Crash
Course free for everyone forever, you
can join our community on Patreon.