# 09 - How Water Shapes the Land.txt
Video ID: xDll-p5g2EQ
Lang: en
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xDll-p5g2EQ

---

A short road trip east of Seattle will
get you here, the channeled scablands.
And they're
weird. There you'll find a gargantuan
gorge in the land that drops steeply
into a wide basin as if a waterfall had
once been there. One 10 times the size
of Niagara Falls. Fertile rolling hills
abruptly end where a barren rocky
expanse begins. There's a massive wall
of volcanic rock [music] and mazes of
channels that look strangely like a
human brain. So, how did it get like
this? I've got one word for you, water.
Hi, I'm Sage and this is Crash Course
Geology.
Water. We swim in it, wash our hands
with it, and drink it out of obnoxiously
large bottles. It's the stuff of life
and Stanley Cups. I didn't understand
the craze until I saw yours, but like I
kind of get it now. And geologically
speaking, it's kind of a big deal. Water
has shaped Earth's landscape for
billions of years in teeny ways and in
massive ones. And it keeps shaping it
every second of every day thanks to the
water cycle, the constant movement of
water between the oceans, glaciers,
lakes, and rivers powered by gravity and
solar energy. One of the main ways water
shapes the Earth is through weathering,
the process of wearing down rock over
time. And that can look like a bunch of
different things. Chemical weathering,
for instance, occurs when chemical
reactions caused by water or other
substances like acid that oozes from
lichens transform or destroys the
minerals in rock. This is how we get
karst landscapes, areas mostly made of
carbonate rock which dissolves when
touched by a weak acid. And you know
what's slightly acidic? Rain. As it
falls and gets absorbed into the ground,
it slowly dissolves the rock little by
little Swiss cheese style over thousands
of years.
Then we end up with incredible caves
like this in Slovenia. Water is also
involved in physical weathering, a
process where natural forces or living
things break or wear away rock. In the
case of water, it can do that through
sheer brute force or by expanding where
it freezes, like it does with this
limestone in the North Pennine region of
England. So, weathering can make big
changes to the landscape, as can its
counterpart, erosion. Weathering happens
when physical, chemical, or biological
processes break or transform a rock.
Erosion happens when gravity, wind, or
water moves those broken-off rock bits,
known as sediment, somewhere else.
Often, erosion is caused by runoff,
water that can't be absorbed by
already-soaked land, so it flows across
the surface. Weathering and erosion join
forces to create some amazing features,
like these ones in Bryce Canyon National
Park. A cap of hard rock on the plateau
protects all the softer rocks below. So,
physical weathering by rain and snowmelt
forms steep cliffs and narrow rocky
walls. Then, as temperatures rise during
the day, water seeps into the cracks in
the rock. As temps plunge below freezing
at night, the water turns to ice,
wedging the rocks apart. Eventually, the
process breaks off chunks, creating
windows in the steep rocky walls.
The roof of each window collapses,
leaving these strange towers behind. And
chemical weathering helps to round the
rocks into a variety of bulbous shapes.
These features go by several equally
fantastic names, depending on their
location, including hoodoos, tent rocks,
and fairy chimneys. You can also see the
effects of weathering and erosion in the
ways rivers change shape. Over time, a
river carves a groove in the land,
whether a V-shaped valley, a steeply
walled slot canyon, or some other shape.
But, all that sediment cut from the
terrain has to go somewhere. The river
whisks that sediment downstream, the
current slowing down as it enters a
larger body of water or flows into a
flat plain. Then, the river dumps the
sand in wetlands, called deltas, or
triangle-shaped deposits, called
alluvial fans. And rivers can change
shape, too. You know how the Mississippi
River looks like this on a map?
That's just like it's current vibe. This
map shows where the river used to flow.
This kind of change happens because over
time water pushes sediments from one
edge of the river to the other forming
meanders or curvy sections. And
sometimes the river spills over taking a
shortcut and flowing in a straight line
again. That creates an oxbow, a
horseshoe-shaped lake. And there about
1,500 oxbows in the lower Mississippi
alone, more than anywhere else in North
America. Now, let's head back to those
cool caves in Slovenia. Remember how I
said they're the result of rainwater
getting absorbed into the ground?
That's called groundwater. Sometimes you
just got to call it like you see it.
Despite its humble name, groundwater is
another major force in shaping Earth's
landscape. But if you're picturing a
subterranean kitty pool, it's not quite
like that. The sediment and rock beneath
us have pores, little openings that can
take in water like a sponge. Even a rock
that seems solid has pores, including
the influencer of rocks, Dwayne. It's
FaceTuned, I promise you.
Some rocks can hold a lot of water while
others can't. That depends on their
porosity or total amount of open space
and their permeability or how easy it is
for fluids to pass from one pore to
another. Sediment and rocks that have
both high porosity and permeability are
called aquifers, pockets of water
underground. Often water only partially
fills the pores near the surface at the
level where tree roots and hedgehogs
hang out. Deeper down, groundwater
completely fills the material's pores.
This point marks the water table, the
boundary where water-saturated ground
begins. Water tables rise and fall for
all sorts of reasons, the slope of the
land, the amount of rainfall or
snowmelt, the porosity and permeability
of the rock, and even how the land is
used. And not only can groundwater
create incredible formations like those
caves in Slovenia, but it can also lead
to geological disasters. Sinkholes, for
example, are common in karst landscapes.
[music]
Groundwater can dissolve so much rock
that the top layers collapse. Areas that
experience tropical storms or droughts
followed by prolonged periods of heavy
rain are particularly susceptible to
land sinkage, as well as areas where
groundwater is over-pumped for human use
and not properly replenished. So, given
time to work with, water can create some
pretty wild features. But, it doesn't
always play the long game.
Water can also change the Earth's
surface fast. Remember the channeled
scablands? Those weird landforms in
eastern Washington? Well, for a long
time, we had no idea what created them
until a high school science teacher
decided he had to know. Let's meet a
couple folks who are geology rockstars
to me.
In 1909, when J. Harlan Bretz started
asking geologists about how the
scablands came to look like that, they
didn't have an answer.
So, he became a geologist himself to
figure it out. On the ground in
Washington, he observed how huge these
features were, all oriented in the same
direction, and made out of hard rock. As
if they'd all been carved by a lot of
water at once. From this evidence, he
concluded that a massive flood, maybe
the largest ever, had carved the
scablands in mere days. To which the
geological community was like, "No way."
At that time, geologists believed that
water only sculpts the land slowly, like
through weathering and erosion. The idea
that water could work so fast sounded
ludicrous. So, to prove his hypothesis,
Bretz had to figure out where all that
water came from. He didn't find an
answer until the 1940s,
when a geologist named J.T. Pardee had a
hunch about a prehistoric glacial lake
in western Montana. He argued that
thousands of years ago, the 2,600-ft
tall ice dam holding the lake had burst,
unleashing a massive amount of water
downhill at high speed. It would be like
if all the water in Lake Erie and Lake
Ontario burst at once. This was the
missing megaflood that carved the
channeled scablands.
It took a couple decades, but eventually
the evidence convinced even the loudest
skeptics. But the case wasn't fully
closed yet. Over the years, Bretz
observed that some parts of the
Scablands seemed more weathered than
others. He updated his theory saying
that there had been at least seven
floods, and later research suggests that
there were at least 80 spread out over 2
to 3,000 years, maybe even earlier ice
ages.
So in a way, both Bretz and his skeptics
were right. Water sculpted the channeled
Scablands in ways both fast and slow.
While floods of this size are
historically rare, flooding on a smaller
scale can still affect the landscape.
Like the Yukon River in Alaska freezes
over every winter and then thaws in the
spring. That water causes erosion and
melts a layer of frozen ground called
permafrost, all of which affects the
chemical balance of the Yukon River. And
that's not to mention the damage to
local communities. Water can also
contribute to landslides. Weathering can
wear down a slope over time. Then when a
heavy rainfall or snowmelt happens, or
another destabilizing event like an
earthquake or volcanic eruption, gravity
can pull large amounts of rock down the
slope all at once. Humans can also
contribute to these disasters, but we'll
get to that in later episodes. While we
can't exactly predict when or if these
kinds of events will happen, geologists
can assess the likelihood using
technologies like radar, electrical
imaging, and computer modeling. The US
Geological Survey shares data with local
governments and the public to prepare
for and map floods. And different
methods of flood mitigation are used all
over the world, including a flood relief
channel in Vienna, sponge cities that
absorb water into the ground in China,
and houses built on stilts by the
indigenous Gaio people of Indonesia. The
more geological information we gather,
the better prepared our communities
[music] are. Everywhere it goes, water
leaves its mark. From moving tiny grains
of sand to carving massive landforms,
its effects can take thousands of years
or mere moments. It hydrates our bodies,
rains down on our homes, and shapes the
very ground below us. Water is a force
to be reckoned with. Next time, we'll
learn about one of the most
ground-breaking theories in geology,
plate tectonics.
See you then. Thanks for watching this
episode of Crash Course Geology, which
was filmed at our studio in
Indianapolis, Indiana, made with the
help of all these cool people.
If you want to help keep Crash Course
free for everyone, forever, you can join
our community on Patreon.