# 10 - What is Plate Tectonics.txt
Video ID: krXXSCb_P9Y
Lang: en
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=krXXSCb_P9Y

---

Almost all the planet's earthquakes and
volcanic eruptions happen in one place,
the Ring of Fire. No, really. That's
what it's called. Dope, I know. Nearly
the whole Pacific Ocean is bordered by
this treacherous region. We're talking
the sites of some of the biggest
earthquakes ever recorded. Massive
volcanoes in Indonesia, Russia, even
Antarctica. Huge explosions and
fractures that happened on land and
underwater.
But why? What makes the Ring of Fire so
fiery? Hi, I'm Sage and this is
CrashCourse Geology.
The Ring of Fire came about thanks to a
billions of years long process where all
the continents, all the ocean floors,
everything that makes up Earth's
outermost layer shifts around, pulling
apart, crashing into each other. What's
that, Dwayne?
Oh, yeah, that does sound like one of
your family reunions. Let's break down
how all that works. Earth has three main
layers, crust, mantle, and core. It's
rigid outer shell, called the
lithosphere, is made up of the crust and
the uppermost part of the mantle. But
the lithosphere isn't just one solid
piece of Earth. It's broken up into
plates, huge slabs of rock that are
puzzle pieced together. They're
generally composed of both continental
lithosphere, which makes up the land we
can see, and oceanic lithosphere, which
makes up the seafloor.
Continental lithosphere is made up of
mostly thick, lightweight granite, while
oceanic lithosphere is made of denser,
heavier rocks like basalt and gabbro.
Roughly 95% of Earth's surface is made
up of seven major plates. The rest
covered by much smaller ones. And
underneath those plates is the
asthenosphere, where intense heat from
Earth's core warms up the mantle rocks
so much that they flow around and bend
like taffy. The hottest rock creeps
upwards towards the surface and the
colder stuff at the top sinks back down,
creating convection currents or
heat-based flow cycles. And those
currents power important forces that
move Earth's plates in one big geologic
slow dance called plate tectonics. Plate
tectonics shapes our world, literally.
And all the action happens where plates
meet, at their edges, called plate
boundaries. Like at divergent
boundaries, plates move away from each
other. As oceanic plates diverge, the
hot mantle rock wells upward and some
erupts as lava, which cools and hardens
into new oceanic crust. This process is
called seafloor spreading, and it's
mainly generated by ridge push, the
gravity-driven force that causes the new
seafloor to sink downward and pushes
away the older crust. When continental
diverge, the Earth's crust thins and
breaks apart, creating features called
rift valleys. We can see this happening
in East Africa, where the Nubian and
Somalian plates started pulling apart
about 25 million years ago. Meanwhile,
at convergent boundaries, plates move
toward each other. When a dense oceanic
plate meets a more buoyant continental
plate, a process called subduction
happens.
The denser plate slides underneath the
other one, returning that rock to the
mantle. This is primarily thanks to slab
pull, the gravitational force that yanks
plates downward. And this is largely
what happens in the Ring of Fire. It's
full of subduction zones. As the oceanic
plates slide deep underground, they
release water into the hot rocks above,
which has an explosive result. That
water can cause the overlying rocks to
melt, driving tons of volcanic activity.
And if two dense oceanic plates meet at
a convergent boundary, subduction can
create huge depressions in the surface,
like the Ring of Fire's Mariana Trench,
which contains the deepest point in the
world. It's on Dwayne's bucket list.
Now, when two continental plates
converge, watch out, cuz instead of
subducting, they'll smash into each
other, forming massive mountain ranges,
like the Alps and the Himalayas. When
continental plates converge with oceanic
ones, the continental plate usually
wins, staying on the surface as the
denser stuff is forced down. But it's
not always a competition.
Sometimes, plates move past each other
at spots called transform boundaries.
You can think of these plates like
pieces of sandpaper. They don't easily
slide past each other.
Eventually, that stress reaches a point
where the ground moves with a jolt.
AKA an earthquake. The San Andreas Fault
in California is a transform boundary
that has had many earthquakes like the
Loma Prieta earthquake in 1989, which
folks in my neck of the woods still talk
about. But that kind of ground rattling
can happen at all types of plate
boundaries when there's enough stress.
Plate movements have shaped what the
Earth's surface looks like throughout
our planet's history. In fact, at
multiple times in Earth's past, the
shifting tectonic plates have caused all
the continents to collide and form one
giant supercontinent. The most recent
one being Pangea around 2 to 300 million
years ago. It's like seeing Earth in her
awkward phase. So, yeah. Plate tectonics
has been happening for a long time.
Keeping the Earth's surface in constant
motion for something like 3 billion
years. The continents move an average of
about
1.5 cm a year. That means that in all of
recorded human history, the ground below
you has shifted probably about
76 m. That's only about as wide as a
professional soccer field. That creeping
movement is way too slow to feel. So,
how do we know it's actually happening?
Way back in the 1910s, German geologist
Alfred Wegner looked at a map of the
world and noticed that the continents
looked like they fit together almost
like puzzle pieces.
And he built a theory to explain what he
was seeing. Continental drift. He
believed that the continents were moving
slowly around the Earth together and
apart, drifting through the crust like
icebergs in the ocean. He's even
credited with coming up with the name
Pangea, meaning all of the Earth. But
the geological community dunked on
Wegner pretty hard. At the time, most
geologists thought that the continents
formed and moved vertically, not
horizontally. Driven by the heating and
cooling of Earth's surface way back when
it formed. But Wegner was onto
something. And his idea laid a
foundation that other geologists built
on. Let's hang out with some of my
geology rock stars.
For a long time, we had no clue what the
seafloor looked like. Most geologists
thought it was just flat. In the 1950s
and '60s, American geologist Marie Tharp
and her collaborator Bruce Heezen used
sonar to map it. Given the culture at
the time, Bruce got to gather data
aboard research ships, while Marie was
forced to stay on land and make maps.
Cuz she was a lady with pens, ink, and
rulers as her tools. She and her
colleague Hester Haring methodically
plotted each data point. And what the
team discovered was incredible. Not a
flat barren wasteland, but a 40,000-mi
underwater mountain range that circled
the globe like a seam on a baseball. The
mid-ocean ridge turned out to be a
series of divergent plate boundaries,
where the mantle wells up as plates pull
apart, forming huge mountains and
driving volcanic eruptions. This was a
major point in favor of plate tectonics
theory. Over the course of several
years, Tharp and Heezen worked with
Austrian artist Heinrich Berann to paint
an accurate map of the entire seafloor.
And in 1977, the World Ocean Floor
Panorama was published.
20 years later, Tharp was named one of
the four greatest cartographers of the
20th century by the Library of Congress.
In 1999, Tharp said that at the start,
"I had a blank canvas to fill with
extraordinary possibilities."
And she did just that. It took decades
and many lines of evidence for the
theory of plate tectonics to develop and
gain consensus. But the combined efforts
of geologists across the world brought
us to the conclusion that the Earth
really does move underneath our feet.
And that consensus didn't look like a
bunch of geologists saying, "Mhm.
Sounds about right." Science historian
Naomi Oreskes called it the first theory
to ever be accepted in the entire
history of Earth science. Can you
imagine that level of harmony? It'd be
like if every film critic agreed on the
best movie ever made. Hank's favorite?
Shrek 2. Today, we know that plate
tectonics shape the planet we know and
love. It's why Europe is warm enough for
people to live there, while Antarctica
is uninhabitable, unless you count the
penguins. Regardless, knowing about
plate tectonics helps us prepare our
communities for disasters like volcanic
eruptions, earthquakes, and tsunamis.
And it gives us a window into Earth's
past. Earth's plates are still moving
right now, and we are still learning
more about them. Like, we don't know
exactly what our planet will look like
in the distant future.
Some predict that 250 million years from
now, Earth may be home to another
supercontinent, similar to good old
Pangea. And we don't know how long plate
tectonics will last. One day, when the
Earth gets old enough to cool way down
inside, plate tectonics will come to a
stop, reshaping the world in a big way,
one last time. That could look like
mountains eroding into plateaus, Earth's
magnetic field stripping away, and
continents sinking into the ocean. But
that's potentially billions of years
away. Plate tectonics isn't going
anywhere anytime soon. And neither is
our massive, magnificent planet. Our
planet moves us, and not just in the
tear-jerking
"Wow, Earth really is something" kind of
way. The land beneath us is constantly
shifting, creating something new every
day, albeit very slowly. Go at your own
pace, girl. As long as the seafloor
keeps spreading and gravity keeps
pulling, Earth's plates will be carrying
us around, shaping and reshaping the
world as we know it. Next time, we'll
talk about how plate tectonics builds
mountains. See you then. Thanks for
watching this episode of Crash Course
Geology, which was filmed at our studio
in Indianapolis, Indiana. It was made
with the help of all these spectacular
people. If you want to help keep Crash
Course free for everyone, forever, you
can join our community on Patreon.