# 11 - How Do Mountains Form.txt
Video ID: r8uQVRVNV14
Lang: en
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=r8uQVRVNV14

---

In 1924, geologist Noel Odell climbed up
the side of Mount Everest [music] and
found something unexpected had beaten
him there. Odell and the rest of his
team were some of the first people on
Earth to climb 7,700 [music]
m up the mountain. But when he dug up
fossils like these out of the
mountainside, he realized that somehow a
bunch of ancient ocean-dwelling
invertebrates had already made the
journey. You heard that right,
ocean-dwelling near the top of the
tallest mountain in the world. How's
that even possible? Hi, I'm Sage and
this is CrashCourse Geology.
Last episode, we talked about plate
tectonics, the idea that Earth's outer
layer, the lithosphere, is broken up
into plates that are moved around by
heat from Earth's mantle and gravity.
And today, we're looking more closely at
how plate tectonics has created the
landscape around us. Like, have you ever
looked at a beautiful mountain view and
just been [music] speechless? Or maybe
wondered, "Now, how'd all that happen?"
Well, we're about to find out. Tectonic
forces, along with other things like
water flow, volcanic and glacial
activity, and even humans, push and pull
on rocks in the lithosphere. That's
called stress, or the force that's
placed on a particular area of rock. Aw,
are you little stressed, Dwayne? Um,
could we get him some chamomile, please?
To picture what geologic stress looks
like, imagine if this candy bar is a
piece of land. If I press on it, stretch
it, or torque it to the side, I'm
applying stress, just like those forces
do to the lithosphere. Stress comes in
different types. Compression, which
squeezes rocks together, tension, which
pulls them apart, and a sideways force
called shear that moves them in parallel
but opposite directions. Under enough
stress, the candy bar will deform. It
can smoosh, stretch, or tear right in
half. Those are examples of strain, the
physical changes that result from
stress. No, don't worry, Dwayne, you're
an indoor rock. No one's going to smoosh
you. For rocks and candy bars, that
deformation can happen in a few main
ways.
That one for you, too, buddy.
One way is through plastic deformation.
If you push or pull on the candy bar,
it'll bend. In the same way,
when certain types of rock experience
high heat and a slow rate of strain deep
under the surface, they can permanently
bend their shape, too. Now, imagine the
candy bar went back to its original
shape after bending.
In geology speak, we call that elastic
deformation, where the rock returns to
what it looked like before it deformed.
But, if the candy bar has been in the
freezer, it won't bend.
It'll snap.
Thank you so much. This is like brittle
deformation. When forces act on rocks
closer to the surface, they can break.
Brittle deformation creates a fault, a
deep fracture or zone of cracks in the
ground caused by surface movement. And
that's where lots of geologic activity
happens. Like when the ground pulls
apart through tension, the result is
often normal faults. This happens when
the rock above the fault moves down
relative to the rock below. You'll
typically find these at divergent plate
boundaries, like the one that forms the
underwater Mid-Atlantic Ridge. On the
other hand, compression can create
reverse faults, where the block on top
moves up and over the one below. We call
it a thrust fault if the angle is
shallow. You'll often find reverse
faults at convergent plate boundaries,
like the one at the heart of the
Himalayas. Geologists call it a mega
thrust fault because it's really big and
shallow. Shear stress can create
strike-slip faults, where two blocks
grind past each other and cause all
kinds of geological chaos. Strike-slip
faults can form long valleys and sharp
cliffs, and even change the flow of
rivers. When they sit along plate
boundaries, we call them transform
faults, like the San Andreas Fault in
California, where a lot of earthquakes
happen. I've experienced half a dozen
earthquakes on this fault, including one
where my granny and I were upstairs and
my grandpa was downstairs watching TV. I
noticed it first and I called out,
"Earthquake!" but my grandpa couldn't
hear over the TV, so when he did get
what I was saying, he yelled, "What? I
can't tell." And then the old man jogged
upstairs during an earthquake out of
pure FOMO. Love you, Papa. Earthquakes
don't happen only at transform faults
[music] though. All kinds of faults can
cause them. In fact, the largest
earthquake ever recorded happened at
thrust faults like the one that
devastated Chile in 1960. We'll get more
into earthquakes in a later episode.
Woo, that was a lot of geo lingo. How
you doing Dwayne?
Yeah, I feel you bud. Let's head back to
Mount Everest to talk about how this bad
boy was made. It's located in the
Himalayan mountain range where two
plates collide at a convergent boundary.
Compression, the type of stress that
squeezes rock together, is the main
force behind orogeny or mountain
building. Compression causes uplift or
the raising of Earth's surface. When
that happens at the boundary between
continental plates, like it did with the
one between India and Eurasia millions
of years ago, there can be massive
results. Namely, the highest mountain
peak on Earth. As for where those marine
critters came from, well, at the same
time as the Indian continent plate was
moving toward the Eurasian plate, an
oceanic plate at the bottom of the
prehistoric Tethys Ocean was subducting.
Essentially, it was sliding beneath the
Eurasian continent pulling India along
with it. When the two continents hit,
the huge force of compression caused the
land to crumple and buckle together,
shoving rock upward. As the Tethys Ocean
floor subducted, some of it got scraped
up by the moving continents and left
behind. All that sediment from the ocean
floor built up between the continents
and formed an accretionary wedge full of
rocks and, yep, fossils from deep down
under the sea. India kept on moving and
that accretionary wedge got shoved
further and further up toward the sky,
forming the Himalayas. And that motion
hasn't stopped. Today, India is still
pressing toward the rest of Asia,
building those mountains up higher and
higher as much as a centimeter a year in
some parts of the range. Yeah, you
thought sea life on the top of a
mountain was going to be the mic drop
moment. Nah, Everest is getting taller.
But not all super tall mountains stay
super tall. Like once upon a time, the
Appalachian Mountains of the US might
have been as tall as the Andes. But,
tectonic shifts aren't squishing the
eastern edge of North America anymore,
so they're no longer growing. In fact,
they're shrinking. Over the years,
weathering and erosion from wind and
water and ice have worn them down and
will continue to do so long into the
future. When it comes to compression,
it's not all about mountains. It does
other cool stuff, too. Like, it warps
rocks into curves or sharp points called
folds. They take the shapes of arches,
troughs, or step-like bends. And while
folds change the shape of rocks,
compression can also change the rocks
themselves. As mountains form, some of
the rock is not only squashed, but also
buried deep underground. As their
minerals transform under high heat and
pressure, the rocks become metamorphic.
This transformation can cause layering
called foliation, which can look like
this. No, sorry. Like this.
So, when you're driving through the
mountains or reaching the peak of a
hike, you're taking in thousands of
years of movement on Earth's surface.
Put that in your Insta caption. But, as
we know, plate tectonics doesn't just
push the land together, it also pulls it
apart through tension. Instead of
thickening, the crust thins out,
deforming the land in different ways.
Like, when the surface is stretched at
divergent boundaries, the rock can break
into a group of normal faults, forming
landscapes like this.
The series of raised blocks are called
horsts and the sunken ones are called
grabens. Horsts and grabens? Who named
these, Lewis Carroll? If the tension is
high enough, those valleys in between
can get really big, like this.
Rift valleys are whole regions where two
tectonic plates pull apart and cause the
land in between to sink way down. One of
the biggest is the East African Rift
Valley, which runs all the way through
East Africa from Jordan down to
Mozambique, where two plates are slowly
sneaking apart. In some places, the
valley floor is already well below sea
level.
And those plates are still pulling away
from each other at a rate of up to 1.5
cm a year, which begs the question,
what is the future of the rift? Along
with other researchers,
Nigerian-American geologist Dr. Philaron
Kilawole has discovered fault systems
that could potentially extend into South
Africa and all the way to the Atlantic
Ocean.
Meaning that far in the future, the
African continent could break apart into
islands, its fractures filling up with a
new ocean. In the meantime, large
earthquakes could become more common in
the area. Kilawole is just one geologist
tackling some of our biggest questions
about the future of Earth's surface.
Will there one day be a new African
ocean? How tall will Mount Everest get?
What will our planet look like as its
plates keep pulling apart and crashing
into each other? Only time and rocks
will tell. Tell me your secrets, Dwayne.
Our planet is full of wild, weird, and
wonderful features thanks to the forces
of plate tectonics. From towering
mountain peaks to vast valleys, Earth's
landforms and deforms in countless ways
that make us go "Whoa." And while we do
know how ancient marine fossils ended up
on top of the world's tallest mountain,
there are still many geological
mysteries left to solve. Next time,
we're diving into marine geology. See
you then. Thanks for watching this
episode of Crash Course Geology, which
is filmed in our studio in Indianapolis,
Indiana. It was made with the help of
all these nice people. If you want to
help keep Crash Course free for everyone
forever, you can join our community on
Patreon.