# 12 - The Deepest Point in the World.txt
Video ID: mLQYGG3SjyQ
Lang: en
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mLQYGG3SjyQ

---

It's about to get freaky. Gargantuan
tubeworms, foot long clams, shrimp with
eyes that can detect radiation. And I'm
not talking about the special at Red
Lobster. These are just a few of the
stranger than fiction creatures you can
find in the deep, dark depths of the
ocean. The ocean is teeming with life,
even its most hostile parts. It fosters
the most spectacular [music] and diverse
life forms imaginable, including us.
Well, just cuz we live on land doesn't
mean we're not homies with their salty
neighbors. Okay, so how does she do it?
What makes the ocean so lifey? Hi, I'm
Sage and this is Crash Course Geology.
The ocean. More than 70% of our planet
is covered in this enormous salty
plankton fililled wonderland. Seriously,
there's a lot of plankton in there.
We've been fascinated by this massive
body of water for centuries. One of the
earliest studies of the ocean started in
1872 when the British HMS Challenger hit
the seas for a 1,250day
journey that covered over 68,000
nautical miles. You could consider it an
early feat of oceanography, the study of
physics, chemistry, biology, and geology
of the oceans. Later, tools like sonar,
submarines, satellites, and submersibles
let us gather data from above and send
stuff below. Everything from cameras to
robots to Titanic director James
Cameron. Voluntarily, of course. He was
really vibing down there. So, today we
know quite a bit about the ocean. And it
isn't just one uniform mass of salt
water. Some parts are way saltier than
others or way hotter or way colder. Some
parts are home to thousands of species
while others support almost none at all.
And when it comes to the seafloor, it's
not just flat and sandy. There's a lot
going on with the ocean's bathimmetry or
the topography of the ocean floor. Now,
I can't take you on a tour of it. The
crash course budget is a little too
tight for a full-on submersible, but I
bet I know someone who would make the
trip. Dwayne, you want to go on a little
adventure?
Dwayne starts his journey on the coast
where the land meets the sea. As he
strikes out onto the seafloor, he'll
roll along the continental shelf, a part
of the ocean floor that's still
continental crust. It's stretched out
and topped with a thick layer of
sediment accumulated over thousands of
years. Continental crust is thicker and
more buoyant than oceanic crust, so it
floats higher on top of the mantle.
Combined with the thick layer of
sediments, the ocean is shallower on the
shelf, usually less than 200 m deep.
Here, you'll find algae, seaweed, and
tons of different kinds of fish and sea
creatures. Oh, hey, look, I found Nemo.
From here, things go downhill fast.
That's the continental slope, the
transition zone between the continental
shelf and the deeper basin of the ocean.
It's made of thinner, denser oceanic
crust. A few kilometers under the
surface, it starts to smooth out again
in an area called the continental rise.
A zone of sediments accumulated at the
base of the slope. And when Dwayne hits
the end, he'll find himself in the
abyss. Or at least the abyssal plane.
No, don't worry, pal. You have location
sharing on. We won't lose you out there.
The abyssal plane is the flatish bottom
of the ocean basin. It's mostly made of
volcanic rock called basaltt and covered
in a layer of sediment. It tends to
hover around 4 and 1/2 kilometers deep.
here. It's hard for much of anything to
survive. It's cold. It's dark. And the
pressure is up to 600 times what it is
on the surface. It's okay. Dwayne can
handle it. Regardless of where you dive
in, there are plenty of cool landforms
to explore under the sea. Like submarine
canyons. When the sea level's low,
they're carved by rivers cutting through
the continental shelf and slope. Then
they're deepened by submarine avalanches
called turbidity currents. And there are
underwater volcanoes called seamounts
where violent submarine volcanic
eruptions built up mountains on the
seafloor. You'll find lots of unique sea
life here. From bubblegum coral and
squat lobsters to loggerhead sea turtles
and rare sigh whales. All right, buddy.
Time to come to the surface. Come on out
of the water. Now, Dwayne just took a
trip along a passive margin, which is
where the continental crust meets an
oceanic crust on the same tectonic
plate. Pretty chill. But if he had
toured, say, South America's western
coast, he would have found a much
narrower continental shelf at an active
margin. That's the edge of a tectonic
plate where lots of earthquakes rattled
the seafloor. Yeah, I'm not going to put
you through that, bud. And there are
other things I'd worry about if Dwayne
had kept wandering the bottom of the
ocean, like hydrothermal vents. They're
underwater chimneys as high as 55 m that
send up blackened plumes of particles
and water hot enough to melt solid
metal. Can you imagine if that's what
happened when they picked a new pope?
Hydrothermal vents are created by plate
tectonics. The theory that Earth's
outermost layer is broken up into chunks
called tectonic plates that move across
the mantle. We got way more into plate
tectonics in an earlier episode, but the
important thing to know today is that it
plays a big role in marine geology. One
place hydrothermal vents form is where
oceanic plates pull apart. Here's how
that happens. At these divergent
boundaries, lava erupts in the gaps and
then cools and hardens into new oceanic
crust or seafloor. All that tectonic
movement can crack deep fissures in the
crust where water and magma mix. The
liquid heats up, dissolving minerals
from the surrounding rocks. And when
that superheated fluid comes back up and
meets the frigid temperatures of the
seafloor, the minerals form stubby
spires and towering chimneys and voila,
a hydrothermal vent. You'll find a lot
of them along underwater mountain ranges
called mid ocean ridges. Hydrothermal
vents pump heat from deep in the earth
into the oceans, creating hot
mineral-rich zones for super weird
creatures to call home. That and the
fact that these vents are often so deep
in the ocean that there's no light for
photosynthesis. Instead, bacteria are
cheosynthetic, meaning they feed on the
chemicals from the vents and they serve
as the base for the food chain there. 2
meter long tubeworms, orange shelled
muscles, and fuzzy crabs all happily
thrive around hydrothermal vents. Marine
geologist study these ecosystems to try
to figure out how life began on Earth
and how it might exist on other planets.
Like some research has found primitive
microorganisms living by hydrothermal
vents, a sign that life could have
started in those environments. And if
chemical eating organisms can exist in
hostile Earth environments, maybe they
can survive elsewhere in the solar
system, too. Hydrothermal vents can also
form at convergent boundaries where a
continental plate and an oceanic plate
collide, plunging one into the mantle
beneath the other. That process creates
a trench, which forms as one plate dives
beneath the other, bending the seafloor
to create a deep V-shaped depression.
And if that happens with two oceanic
plates, the trench is massive. That's
how we got the Challenger Deep, the
deepest point in the world. Located in
the Pacific's Mariana Trench, it reaches
nearly 11,000 m below sea level. So deep
that Mount Everest could fit inside with
room to spare. Well, at least that's how
deep we think it is. Cuz it turns out
measuring it is surprisingly difficult.
Since the HMS Challenger, we've been
trying to measure it. starting with a
weighted rope and then graduating to
sonar technology in the '50s. The most
accurate estimates as of filming in 2026
came from a series of submersible dives
in 2020, which clocked it at 10,935
m deep. But it's hard to know for sure.
We can't exactly drop a yard stick down
there to get an exact answer. What we do
know is that just like at hydrothermal
vents, life exists in deep sea trenches.
And that life is weird with a capital W.
We're talking transparent sea cucumbers,
saucer size single-sellled organisms,
and shrimplike critters that eat sunken
wood. But the ocean's geology doesn't
just create hot spots for life on the
seafloor. It affects life everywhere on
Earth, especially through currents.
Currents are continuous, directed
oceanic movements that carry water
across the globe. They're driven by
wind, water density, tides, and earth's
rotation, and they're affected by
baimemetry, which can change their speed
and direction. For example, about 3
million years ago, tectonic shifts
formed the ismas of Panama, which
connected North and South America. This
stretch of land deflected the warm,
salty ocean current that once flowed
through the gap. It redirected that
water northward, which warmed up Europe.
And currents can have a cooling effect,
too. Like when Antarctica broke off from
South America, this allowed frigid
waters to circle the continent, creating
a barricade for warmer waters and
chilling Antarctica into the frozen
landscape we know today. One of the most
important contributions of ocean
currents is the distribution of
nutrients. Upwelling currents bring
nutrient-rich waters from deep in the
ocean upward to feed microorganisms at
the base of marine food webs. Currents
can even move animals themselves like a
watery superighway, distributing
populations of everything from plankton
to fish eggs to sea turtle hatchlings,
influencing how these creatures evolve.
Oceans pump tons of water around the
globe in a so-called global conveyor
belt of currents, mostly driven by
changes in temperature and saltiness.
Basically, water that's saltier and
colder is more dense and sinks,
traveling along the deep ocean bottom,
while water that's less salty and warmer
is less dense and upwells. But as we
unleash greenhouse gases into the
atmosphere, Arctic temperatures are
warming, which means ocean waters are
cooling slower and glaciers are melting
faster, flushing fresh water into the
mix. All of that slows down the conveyor
belt. The ocean also acts as a huge
carbon sink storing carbon dioxide so
that it doesn't warm the atmosphere.
That's a massive deal for a lot of
reasons like the temperature of the
earth determines what kind of creatures
can live here, including us. But a
surface water warms and currents slow.
The surface waters saturate with carbon
dioxide and can't absorb anymore. Many
scientists recommend cutting carbon
emissions to prevent large-scale
disruption of currents and ocean
environments. You can learn more about
that in Crash Course Climate and Energy.
Earth's oceans are still full of
mysteries. As of June 2024, we've only
mapped about a quarter of the world's
seafloor in high resolution. That means
there's a whole 3/4 that could still be
hiding even more creepy little Earth
aliens. Dwayne wants to see more of
those fuzzy crabs. The ocean is much
more than a big pool of salt water. And
the seafloor isn't just an underwater
sandy beach, either. The bottom of the
ocean is a maze of slopes, trenches, and
[music] formations that show us plate
tectonics in action. It creates habitats
for creepy creatures and affects the
currents that are [music] essential to
Earth's climate and life. Our planet
wouldn't be the same without it. In our
next episode, we'll tackle volcanoes.
See you then. Thanks for watching this
episode of Crash Course Geology, which
is filmed in our studio in Indianapolis,
Indiana, and was made with the help of
all these nice people. If you want to
help keep Crash Course free for everyone
forever, you can join our community on
Patreon.
[bell]