# 13 - Volcanoes Explained.txt
Video ID: BMZbbewOLvU
Lang: en
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BMZbbewOLvU

---

Ready for a vacation? This lake may seem
like paradise, but it's got an explosive
origin story. On the North Island of New
Zealand, you'll find Lake Tao, and you
can see why it's a popular tourist
destination. [music] It's got amazing
views, decadent hot springs, and
freaking waterfalls, man. But around
25,500 years ago, you definitely
wouldn't want to be in its vicinity
because this placid lake formed from a
massive volcanic super eruption. The
volcano shot out tons of lava and
volcanic ash, buckling the earth into a
depression about the size of Singapore.
Eventually, it filled with water and
became Lake Tao. Amazing, right? And
kind of terrifying. Hi, I'm Sage and
this is Crash Course Geology.
From the huge Mount Davabond in Iran to
the tiny Tal in the Philippines to the
infamous Mount Doom in Mordor, volcanoes
capture our imagination. Yeah, I know
Lord of the Rings isn't real, but it's
based on real volcanoes. Okay. Whether
we're talking the real deal or
paperier-mâché, volcanoes can be equal
parts enthralling and scary because,
well, they do this. Stand back, Dwayne.
You're right. Well, in real life, they
erupt. But why? And what actually is a
volcano anyway? Geologically speaking, a
volcano is a crack in the ground, aka a
vent, that lava comes out of. It can
also refer to the land formations that
build up around those vents, like the
mountain looking things we might think
of when we hear the word volcano. But
volcanoes aren't just mountains,
especially because they erupt. Let's
take a look at how that happens. Magma
is what we call molten rock that's
underground, and it's actually pretty
chill. Metaphorically, literally, it's
like 1,000° C down there. The pressure
is way higher than it is on the surface.
And that pressure combined with the high
heat allows gases like water vapor,
carbon dioxide, and sulfur to dissolve
into the magma. Magma is less dense than
the surrounding rock, so it tends to
rise toward the surface and collect in
underground pools called magma chambers,
which do a pretty good job of keeping
things contained usually. But put a
little crack in the rock above and
things get explody. Think of that magma
with all its dissolved gases like a
shaken up bottle of soda. As long as the
cap's still on, everything's fine. But
unscrew it even a tiny bit, and you'd
better have your goggles on. As soon as
the gases have a path to the surface,
they come speeding up like the bubbles
in your soda, carrying that hot molten
rock with them. Magma then breaks the
surface and becomes a lava, the name we
give to molten rock when it's above
ground. And voila, an eruption. Not all
eruptions are equal, though. Some are
huge and explosive, while others look
more like a cool feature at a water
park. That difference partly comes from
the amount of gas that's dissolved in
the magma. More gas equals more
explosive power. But the other key is
how much silica the lava has. Silica is
one of the most plentiful chemical
compounds on Earth's surface and helps
determine how gooey the lava is. Low
silica lava, also called mafic lava,
creates super runny flows that race
across the surface in rivers or spurts
up as fountains. High silica lava,
called felic lava, is thick and sticky,
preventing the gases from easily
escaping. Pressure builds up until
blammo, you get an explosion. And those
eruptions from different types of lava
create different shapes of volcanoes,
too. Like the reiest lavas often create
shield volcanoes, which are big, low,
and flat. Kilawa is an example. Its lava
flows harden into broad flanks of
basaltt that end up looking kind of like
a shield. But if the lava is extra gassy
or has slightly more silica, eruptions
can get a little more explosive. Lava
can sputter up along fractures on the
ground called a fissure eruption. Or it
can fountain from a central vent falling
back down as terra chunks of rock that
can be as small as ash or as big as
houses. This can create small
steep-sided volcanoes called cinder
cones like Pari Coutine in Mexico.
Cinder cones look tiny in comparison to
composite volcanoes aka strat volcanoes
like Mount Fuji in Japan. They're
towering conicle peaks that loom over
the landscape often with a distinct
crater at their summit, you know. So,
the hobbits have somewhere to chuck that
ring. Composite volcanoes erupt with
remarkable variety, sometimes unleashing
torrent of lava, other times sending up
volcanic plumes of terra that fall back
to Earth. These combinations of
eruptions build up the composite
volcano's iconic steep flanks. When lava
is extra sticky, it can't flow away from
the vent, so it may pile up around it,
creating a lava dome. Sometimes lava
domes stand freely on their own, but
they can also form inside structures
like calderas, which are created when a
ton of magma erupts quickly and drains
the chamber below, causing the surface
to collapse. The result is a huge
bowl-shaped caldera like Lake Tao. So,
volcanoes come in all kinds of shapes
and sizes, and you can find them all
over the world, but they don't pop up
just anywhere. For magma to burst from
the surface, conditions have to be just
right. Many volcanic eruptions happen at
plate boundaries, places where the
tectonic plates that make up Earth's
outermost layers squish together or
spread apart. Like lots of volcanoes
form at subduction zones where two
tectonic plates converge. One gets
forced beneath the other and back into
the mantle. The mantle's heat causes the
downgoing plate to release water which
reduces the melting point of the rocks
above. That's how you get magma
collecting in reservoirs that can blast
to the surface. Volcano can form at
divergent boundaries, too. Sometimes
that happens on land in places called
continental rifts, where two continental
plates pull apart from each other,
causing hot mantle rock to well upward.
And this process is way more common
underwater. Geologists estimate that
more than 70% of the world's volcanoes
are hidden under the sea at mid ocean
ridges. Divergent plate boundaries where
two oceanic plates are pulling apart.
Geologists finally witnessed an eruption
at a mid ocean ridge for the first time
in 2025. Just so cool. Sometimes
volcanoes can form in places called hot
spots, where a big plume of super hot
mantle rock rises up underneath the
crust, causing a rock to melt and erupt
at the surface. We have hot spots to
thank for Yellowstone, whose hot spot
now sits right below the northwest
corner of the United States. Now, you
might have heard Yellowstone described
as a super volcano, which could cause
colossal destruction if it erupted
again. But super volcano isn't a
scientific term. Most geologists kind of
roll their eyes at it. It's like their
personal Nickelback. Look at this super
volcano. Technically, a super volcano is
a volcano that's had at least one super
eruption, like the one that formed Lake
Tao. What counts as a super eruption
comes down to the volcanic explosivity
index or VEI, which ranks the intensity
of volcanic eruptions on a scale of 0 to
8. For context, the strongest volcanic
eruptions of the past century or so were
all around a six on the VEI. But a super
eruption is a VEI of eight, meaning it
ejects at least 1,000 cubic kilm of ash,
pummus, and debris. That's enough
volcano stuff to fill 400 million
Olympic swimming pools. The 100 meter
butterfly would be just so different.
But could this really happen at
Yellowstone? Whole towns and cities
covered in ash. Emergency services
stymied global agriculture collapse. In
theory, yes. But the last super eruption
at Yellowstone was around 640,000 years
ago. And geologists say there's an
exceedingly low chance that a super
eruption would happen in the next few
thousand years. Some aren't convinced
another will ever happen again. And just
because a volcano has had one or even
two super eruptions in the past doesn't
mean its future blasts will be as hefty.
Even if a super eruption were going to
happen at Yellowstone, we'd have some
notice. Volcanologists, who are not a
species from Star Trek, but rather
scientists who study volcanoes, keep
tabs on the amount of magma held within
the volcano's underground reservoir
using tools like seismometers. Recent
studies suggest there is more magma down
there than we initially thought. But
more importantly, it's spread across
many smaller underground pockets. It's
not linked up enough to erupt in one big
boom. So you have geologist blessing.
You can take a Yellowstone super
eruption off your things to worry about
list. But just because super eruptions
aren't much of a threat to us doesn't
mean regular old volcanic eruptions
aren't. Across the world about 800
million people live within 100 km of an
active volcano. Now the meaning of
active can vary. Like some geologists
use active to refer to volcanoes that
are erupting right now. And others use
it to mean any volcano that's erupted in
the last 11,000 years or so. Dormant
volcanoes aren't erupting right now, but
might in the future. And extinct
volcanoes were active once, but aren't
expected to erupt ever again, even
though they can surprise us once in a
while. But it's not all Mount Doom and
gloom living near an active volcano. In
small doses, volcanic ash is really good
for crops. Volcanoes are where we find a
lot of our most prized minerals like
gold, silver, copper, lead, and zinc.
And the heat of volcanic systems can be
tapped for geothermal energy, which
we'll get more into in a later episode.
But some eruptions can cause serious
destruction. Thick volcanic ash can
blanket crops, collapse structures, and
suffocate people and animals. Plus,
eruptions can cause avalanches of hot
ash called pyrolastic flows, and
landslides and mudslides called laahars.
So, it makes sense that some folks have
tried to control erupting volcanoes.
Like in 1935, the US Army tried to
change the course of lava flows from
Monaloa by bombing it, which didn't
really work. Truth be told, there's no
way to stop a volcano from erupting.
There's no big cork you can stick in
there. But there are ways to forecast
and prepare for eruptions. Geologists
and volcanologists monitor warning signs
of volcanic activity like earthquakes,
swelling in the ground, and steam
arising ominously from places it
shouldn't. They also base forecasts on
volcanoes recurrence intervals or the
average time between past volcanic
eruptions. This can give us clues to
when a peak might erupt again. And when
it comes to disaster preparedness, there
are a few things you can do. One is to
learn about volcano risks in your area
and sign up for alerts from your local
government. Another is to form an
evacuation plan and gather emergency
supplies like food, water, masks, and
clothing. There's more on volcano
preparedness in the links below. So,
yeah, volcanic eruptions can be scary.
They can also be enthralling,
fascinating, and even pretty chill. Some
create huge calderas that turn into
popular tourist destinations, and some
just blow off a little steam. Earth's
geology is chaotic like that.
Sweet. Next time we're talking about
another geological hazard, earthquakes.
See you then. Thanks for watching this
episode of Crash Course Geology, which
is filmed in our studio in Indianapolis,
Indiana, was made with the help of all
these nice people. If you want to help
keep Crash Course free for everyone
forever, you can join our community on
Patreon.
&gt;&gt; [bell]