# 14 - Earthquakes Explained.txt
Video ID: WNvAic8KLb0
Lang: en
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WNvAic8KLb0

---

Earthquake!
&gt;&gt; The word alone can paint intense
pictures. Giant cracks splitting the
ground open, swallowing cars and
buildings, the after effects of
tsunamis, landslides, and fires. Scary
stuff. Some earthquakes are strong
enough to be deadly. But of the roughly
1 million detectable quakes that shake
our planet every year, most are too mild
to rattle even a teacup.
So, can we predict the bad ones? Hi, I'm
Sage, and this is CrashCourse Geology.
Let's start with a simple question.
What's an earthquake? Basically, it's
any sudden shaking of the ground caused
by waves of energy in the Earth. That
energy can come from landslides,
churning magma, or even meteorite
impacts. But usually, an earthquake is
the fault of
a fault.
No, wait. Not like The Fault in Our
Stars.
Faults are underground cracks in Earth's
crust where blocks of rock slide and
scrape against each other. They can
range from thousands of kilometers long
to smaller than your fingernail. It's no
coincidence that some of the most active
earthquake-prone faults sit at the edges
of tectonic plates, those massive slabs
of crust and bits of upper mantle that
surf atop the lower mantle. Tectonic
plates are moving all the time, very
slowly. This movement puts stress on the
rock within Earth's crust. As stress
builds, it causes strain or physical
changes to that rock, pushing it,
pulling it, or shearing it. Some
movement along the fault happens at such
tiny, steady creep that there's not
enough energy to generate an earthquake.
But under great stress, brittle rocks in
the crust can bend only so far before
something's got to give. One side of the
fault slips against the other, and all
that pent-up energy breaks loose. That
energy rolls out in waves that jiggles
the ground, sometimes drastically
changing the surface. That's an
earthquake. It's basically rock stress
relief. It's good to shake it off
sometimes, right Dwayne?
But if most earthquakes are so mild we
can't even feel them, how do we know
they're happening?
For that, we turn to seismologists,
geologists who specialize in studying
seismic waves, the energy that's
unleashed after a slip and breakage on a
fault. Seismologists use GPS, radar
satellites, and super sensitive machines
called seismographs to detect and
analyze these waves as they travel
underground. Global networks of these
machines record seismic data, which then
get shared and studied through a
facility called SAGE. No big deal.
Seismologists help us not only better
understand how earthquakes happen, but
also estimate the risks of one
happening. Now, there's more than one
type of seismic wave, and some are more
dangerous than others. First, there are
body waves. Body waves begin from an
earthquake's hypocenter or focus, the
underground point on a fault where the
rock cracks. Then they take a curving
path through Earth's insides before
reaching the surface. There are two
kinds of body waves. A P-wave or primary
wave compresses and squeezes the
particles it moves through. It's sort of
like what happens when you pull a Slinky
out on a flat surface from both ends and
push on one side.
P-waves are the speediest waves, so
they're the ones that hit first.
They're what causes the initial jolt of
an earthquake, but they usually aren't
very destructive. S-waves, on the other
hand, are secondary and often quite
damaging. They move through the rock
more slowly and they shear particles
side-to-side or up and down. Sort of
like if I jiggled the Slinky like this.
Buildings, especially older ones,
struggle to withstand the horizontal
waggle, sometimes causing them to
topple. So, those are the body waves,
but there's another major type of
seismic wave, surface waves, which
travel along the, well, surface.
And even though surface waves are the
slowest, they can be the most
destructive because they produce an
undulating pattern with an up and down,
back and forth, and side-to-side motion.
But, not all big earthquakes necessarily
produce strong shaking at the surface.
Like, seismic waves from an earthquake
deep underground largely peter out by
the time they reach the surface. Seismic
waves are more intense the closer you
are to an earthquake's epicenter, the
point that's directly above where the
fault slipped. The type of ground that
seismic waves move through can also
affect the intensity of an earthquake.
Like, in 2011, an earthquake in Virginia
was felt up to 600 mi away from its
epicenter. But, an even stronger
earthquake in California was only felt
about 250 mi away. The reason? Older
rocks. Seismic waves on the US East
Coast travel farther because the rocks
there are much older than the rocks on
the West Coast. The faults in these
older rocks have had more time to heal,
which lets the waves cross them more
effectively and be felt much farther
away. Meanwhile, these young
whippersnapper rocks out on the West
Coast have newer faults, which means
seismic waves don't spread as
effectively. When it comes to measuring
earthquakes, scientists use a system
called moment magnitude, or MW, an
update to the more familiar Richter
scale.
Moment magnitude describes the absolute
energy released during an earthquake.
It's reached through a combination of
seismic data and the physical shifts in
the land that happened during an
earthquake. Usually, this is just
referred to as magnitude, or how much
energy was released in general. The
bigger the area of a fault that breaks,
the bigger the magnitude. Often, when a
big earthquake first makes the news, its
magnitude is just a rough estimate. A
truly accurate measurement can take days
to calculate. Even though it might not
sound like it at first, the difference
between just one order of magnitude can
be striking.
Magnitude is measured on a logarithmic
scale. So, each whole number represents
a 10-fold jump in energy. Let's put that
in spaghetti terms, ala my favorite
earthquake geologist Dr. Wendy Bohon.
Just go with me.
Let's say a 4.0 magnitude earthquake is
equivalent to the energy it takes to
snap one noodle. Ah, don't get mad at
me, Italians. It's for science.
If that's the case,
then a 5.0 magnitude event would be like
snapping
32 noodles.
And a 6.0 magnitude earthquake
would be like snapping roughly a
thousand noodles.
Yeah, I don't think I can do that. I'm
just going to clean this up.
So, the higher up you go on the scale,
even by just a point or two, the more
drastic the consequences. Consider the
2009 earthquake that struck the city of
L'Aquila, Italy. It was eventually
recorded as a 6.2 on the moment
magnitude scale.
The quake brought 20,000
buildings crashing to the ground,
killing over 300 people, injuring 1,500,
and leaving 65,000 [music] houseless. It
left a lot of people asking,
"Was this damage preventable?" For weeks
before the quake, the people of L'Aquila
felt smaller tremors in the city, but a
government commission tasked with
monitoring earthquake risk reassured the
public that the shaking was normal and a
bigger event was unlikely. Sadly, those
tremors turned out to be foreshocks,
smaller earthquakes that sometimes
precede a serious event.
In light of the tragedy, that government
official and six scientists were accused
of giving, {quote} "inexact, incomplete,
and contradictory information that
downplayed the true risks." Three years
after the earthquake, an Italian court
convicted them of manslaughter for not
properly warning the public of the
danger. But, here's the thing, we can't
know if something's a foreshock until
after the bigger earthquake happens.
It's common for small earthquakes not to
lead up to a worse event. And it's
possible for a strong earthquake to
happen with no foreshocks preceding it.
So, can we tell when a tremor is nothing
to worry about and when it's the lead up
to something more dangerous? And how do
seismologists even estimate earthquake
risk? Well, it's nuanced. You see,
prediction has a very specific meaning
in earthquake speak.
To predict an earthquake means you've
pinned down the exact time, date,
location, and severity. No one
has ever predicted an earthquake.
Not once. In the words of the US
Geological Survey,
"We do not know how and we do not expect
to know how anytime in the foreseeable
future." In other words, you can't just
schedule an earthquake reminder in your
Google calendar. What scientists can do
is forecast earthquake risk in a certain
area. It's a lot like a weather report.
A meteorologist can't tell you if or
when it will rain, only that there might
be rain somewhere during a certain
period. Forecasts deal in probability.
It's an estimate of the long-term odds
of an earthquake happening in a specific
fault sometime in the future based on
how much time has passed between big
earthquakes in a particular spot, which
is why gathering and analyzing seismic
data is so important. They're what
forecasts are based on. They're also
based on literally digging into the past
for evidence of shaking up sediment in
the rock record, which tells us about
the cadence of ancient earthquakes.
There's always some uncertainty in
forecasting, much like what happened
with the L'Aquila earthquake.
Over 5,000 members of the scientific
community signed an open letter to
Italy's president calling it "manifestly
unfair" to bring criminal charges
against scientists for not acting on
information that, quote,
the international scientific community
would consider inadequate for issuing a
warning. In light of those facts, the
charges against the scientists were
dropped in 2014. And though we'll
probably never have an earthquake
crystal ball, there are ways we can
prepare. Places like Japan, Mexico, and
California have developed early warning
systems that notify people at the first
signs of seismic waves, giving even a
few precious seconds to get to a safer
spot before the big shock hits. Many
areas require new buildings to be
constructed with earthquake-resistant
techniques and materials, so they're
less likely to collapse. And because
earthquakes can happen anywhere, we can
all personally prepare by getting
familiar with the seismic risk where we
live, and learning what to do if an
earthquake ever affects our area.
Earthquakes can happen anywhere on
Earth, at any time. And unfortunately,
we have no way of predicting exactly
when or where. But by studying and
tracking seismic data, scientists
continue to refine forecasts, better
assess the risks, and even research how
to prevent and protect us from the most
damaging shocks. Next time, we'll learn
more about earthquake preparedness.
See you then. Thanks for watching this
episode of Crash Course Geology, which
was filmed in our studio in
Indianapolis, Indiana. It was made with
the help of all these nice people.
If you want to help keep Crash Course
free for everyone, forever, you can join
our community on Patreon.