# 39 - Volcanoes Formation Types Activity.txt
Video ID: sd8cVCtIRO4
Lang: en
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sd8cVCtIRO4

---

He knows a lot about the science stuff,
Professor Dave Explains.
Throughout this geology series, we've
been describing the Earth as a dynamic
place where huge plates of continental
crust float atop a plastic-like mantle,
and the forces of wind, water, and
gravity create unique sedimentary rocks.
But now we're going to explore one of
Earth's most dynamic features of all,
volcanoes.
We've all heard of volcanoes before, as
these are fascinating and powerful
structures, making them the subject of
myth and legend over the millennia.
Volcanoes are present on every
continent, even Antarctica, and they are
responsible for creating over 80% of
Earth's surface above and below sea
level.
Geologists define a volcano as any
location where lava erupts onto the
surface, either as a subaqueous eruption
on the ocean floor or a subaerial
eruption on land.
The geologists who study volcanoes, who
are called volcanologists, measure
emitted volcanic gases, ground
deformation, and seismic activity in
order to predict volcanic behavior and
understand the dynamic processes beneath
Earth's crust.
We talked about how volcanoes form when
we were learning about igneous minerals.
So let's start with a quick review.
Volcanoes form above areas where the
mantle melts, either due to
decompression melting or melting from
the addition of water. Most of the
active volcanism on Earth occurs at
divergent plate boundaries, especially
mid-ocean ridges.
On land, volcanism occurs along
subduction zones and above mantle
plumes.
Volcanoes form along a curved line
called a volcanic arc at subduction
zones, which corresponds to the area
where the subducted slab releases its
chemically bound water into the mantle.
When the overriding plate is oceanic
crust, the chain of volcanoes is called
an island arc, and when the overriding
plate is continental crust, it is called
a continental arc. Volcanoes that form
above mantle plumes are called hotspots,
which is the only type of volcano that
can form outside of plate boundaries.
Finally, volcanoes on continental crust
tend to be explosive and erupt felsic
lava, while volcanoes on oceanic crust
are effusive, erupting mafic lava.
Having reviewed volcanism's causes,
let's now list the types of volcanoes.
There are six main types that the
geologists have identified on Earth.
Cinder cones, composite volcanoes,
shield volcanoes,
large igneous provinces, seafloor
volcanism, and kimberlite pipes.
Before we elaborate on each type, let's
talk a bit more generally about volcanic
structure and activity. Volcanoes are
essentially just giant piles of
interlayered ash and lava flows that
erupt from the volcano's vent or vents.
Volcanoes that are primarily made of
unconsolidated material like ash are
very weak and prone to collapse, whereas
more solid volcanoes that are mainly
lava flows are more structurally sound.
There are two main types of lava,
pahoehoe, which is a less viscous,
higher temperature lava that erupts from
basaltic volcanoes, and a'a, which is a
more viscous, blocky lava that sort of
avalanches its way down the volcano,
collapsing under its own weight. In
addition to lava, volcanoes can erupt
solid material, generally called tephra,
which can range from ash to large
volcanic bombs, which are boulder-sized
pieces of material that solidify in the
air during eruption.
Another important property of a volcano
is its explosivity. Explosive volcanoes
erupt silica-rich felsic lava and have
high amounts of dissolved gases,
especially water, and effusive volcanoes
erupt mafic lava at higher temperatures
and have lesser amounts of dissolved
gases. Explosive volcanoes tend to form
along continental arcs, while effusive
volcanoes are most common among
mid-ocean ridges and seamounts, where
they sit on oceanic crust.
Now, back to the types of volcanoes.
Scoria cones, sometimes called cinder
cones, are the smallest type of volcano,
standing between a dozen and 1,000 ft
tall. They are notorious for their high
dissolved gas content and quick-growing,
short-lived nature. Eruptions are
powered by the pressure of their
dissolved gases, which come out of
solution during eruption and get frozen
into the newly formed rock. This type of
volcanic rock is said to be vesicular.
Scoria cone eruptions are spattery and
explosive due to their high gas content.
When volcanoes erupt explosively, their
ejected lava rapidly cools as it flies
through the air, forming tiny particles
of ash and glassy chunks of rocks called
cinders.
They are called cinders because they
resemble ash from a coal furnace. Though
explosive in nature, scoria cones erupt
basaltic lava. The volcano itself, which
is mainly made of pieces of cinders
piled up at the angle of repose, is more
like a pile of sediment than a rocky
mountain, and is therefore easily
eroded.
The formation of the volcano Parícutin
nicely illustrates the rapid growth of
cinder cones. On February 20th, 1943, a
Mexican farmer named Dionisio Pulido was
tending to his field when suddenly the
ground began to shake and soon swelled 2
m upward, forming a fissure that spewed
sulfury smoke.
By nightfall, lava was shooting from the
fissure, and a 50-m tall volcano had
formed by morning, rising to 150 m after
a week.
The volcano stopped erupting in 1952,
but not until forming a scoria cone 424
ft tall and spreading lava over 26
square miles. In addition to destroying
Pulido's farm, the volcano leveled the
two nearest towns and displaced
thousands.
Composite or stratovolcanoes usually
form at subduction zones, especially
continental arcs. When most people
imagine a volcano in their minds, they
are probably imagining a stratovolcano.
Stratovolcanoes can rise as tall as
8,000 ft with steep slopes up to 36°.
The name stratovolcano arises from its
structure, which is alternating layers
or strata of lava flows and tephra with
a central vent. Though stratovolcanoes
can produce lava flows, the lava they
extrude usually just piles up atop the
vent, forming a giant blob of viscous
magma called a lava dome.
Once the lava dome solidifies, it plugs
up the volcano, stopping it from
releasing its pressure. This, in
combination with the high water content
of their lava, leads to a tendency for
extremely explosive eruptions.
Stratovolcano lava is viscous for two
reasons. First, it is about 500° lower
in temperature when compared with an
effusive volcano like Hawaii, and
second, it is rich in silica. When
silica is a component of a melt, it
polymerizes or forms networks of bonds,
which makes it increasingly resistant to
flow with increasing silica content.
When an explosive eruption occurs, the
pile of lava and tephra that is the
volcano can be partially or entirely
blasted away and incorporated into a
hot, rapidly moving mass of ash, rock,
and gas called a pyroclastic flow.
After being blasted into the air by the
eruption, the pyroclastic material
begins to fall back down to Earth, where
it flows along the ground and spreads
out, reaching speeds of up to 700 km/h
with temperatures of up to 1,000° C.
Pyroclastic flows are the deadliest
volcanic hazard and obliterate anything
in their path. One of the most famous
composite volcanoes is Mount St. Helens,
which erupted on May 18th, 1980, in the
deadliest volcanic event in American
history. Instead of blowing its top like
most volcanoes, Mount St. Helens
exploded from the side, which directed
the pyroclastic flow laterally,
flattening an area 23 mi wide by 19 mi
long. Large trees were snapped at the
base of their trunks like twigs. 185 mi
of highway were destroyed, and 57 people
were killed.
Shield volcanoes are some of the largest
volcanoes on Earth, and they commonly
form by mantle plume activity away from
plate boundaries. They almost
exclusively extrude runny basaltic lava
from small vents and fissures that
gradually build up to form a volcanic
dome with slopes less than 10°. The
diameter of typical shield volcanoes can
range from 3 to 4 mi with heights up to
2,000 ft.
The Hawaiian Islands are some of the
best examples of shield volcanoes.
Mauna Loa, one of the Earth's most
active volcanoes, is the largest,
spanning 74 mi from north to south and
rising over 28,000 ft above the ocean
floor.
Large igneous provinces are massive
deposits of igneous rocks, where in some
cases millions of cubic kilometers of
lava have been erupted in a very short
amount of time, geologically speaking,
with the bulk of the magmatism occurring
in less than 1 million years in most
cases.
One type of LIP, called flood basalts or
traps, are large igneous plateaus with a
step-like morphology and are associated
with many of Earth's worst mass
extinctions. For example, the Siberian
Traps, which we discussed in the
tutorial regarding Earth's history, are
often cited as being the triggering
event of the end-Permian mass
extinction, which was the worst mass
extinction of all time.
In addition, another flood basalt called
the Deccan Traps began erupting around
the time of the end Cretaceous
extinction event, which is typically
attributed to an asteroid impact. Can
this be a coincidence or perhaps the
asteroid impact somehow triggered this
eruption? This is a hotly debated topic
among geologists.
LIPs can form over both oceanic and
continental crust and do not correlate
with tectonic environments. So, what
causes them? Due to the extremely high
heat flow required to produce so much
magma over such a short period of time,
it has recently been accepted that
mantle plumes are the culprit. Mantle
plumes sort of resemble lollipops and
have a bulbous head of swirling hot
mantle that is supplied by a smaller
tail, which connects down to the
core-mantle boundary.
So, as the head of a plume reaches the
crust, it causes a short period of
intense volcanism that tapers off as its
tail nears the surface.
The Columbia River Basalt is a
well-studied flood basalt that began
erupting around 17 million years ago in
southeastern Oregon.
It is composed of over 300 individual
lava flows with around 10,000 years
between major eruptions. The onset of
volcanism was sudden and intense with
85% of the lava erupting over a 1
million year period between 15 and 16
million years ago, which slowly tapered
off to widely spaced and sporadic
eruptions by 13 million years ago.
Eruption of this LIP was probably
related to the Yellowstone hotspot,
which was located beneath southeastern
Oregon during the onset of volcanism,
though this too is a highly debated
topic.
Seafloor volcanism occurs along
mid-ocean ridges where basaltic lava
erupts from large linear volcanoes or
fissures. Fissure volcanoes also occur
along areas that are rifting, such as
Iceland and East Africa. The vast
majority of the lava that has erupted on
Earth over its history has come from
fissure volcanoes along mid-ocean
ridges.
The intensity of seafloor volcanism also
has a large impact on ocean chemistry
due to hydrothermal circulation along
the ridge leaching magnesium from
seawater.
During times of rapid seafloor
spreading, so much magnesium is removed
from the ocean that different minerals
begin to precipitate from seawater,
which even affects the ability of marine
organisms to build their shells.
Most of the material erupted from
volcanoes comes from the upper mantle
and lower crust, but there are cases
where deeper material can get dragged to
the surface during an eruption.
Kimberlite pipes are deep-seated magma
conduits or pipes that draw up
ultramafic magma from 150 to 450 km
below the surface and exhibit violent
explosive eruptions that rapidly carry
mantle material to the surface.
Kimberlites often contain diamonds and
other high-pressure minerals like
coesite, a polymorph of quartz.
They also have an unusual chemistry for
ultramafic rocks, being rich in
potassium, sodium, phosphorus, and
carbon.
In addition, kimberlites can contain
fragments of rock and large crystals
called xenoliths that provide geologists
with their only physical samples of the
lower asthenosphere. The most recent
kimberlite eruption occurred 10,000
years ago in Tanzania.
So, that covers the types of volcanoes
and their formation. While volcanoes are
fascinating and awe-inspiring, they can
also be extremely deadly and dangerous.
Sulfuric gas emissions, razor-sharp
tephra, lung-filling ash, molten lava,
pyroclastic flows, and fast-moving
mudflows of volcanic ash called lahars
cause widespread health effects and
property destruction. However, with new
developments in seismometers and
satellite measurements of ground
deformation, volcanologists can monitor
the telltale signs of volcanic
eruptions.
Some of the most important signs of a
volcanic eruption are gas leaks,
deformation or bulging around the
volcano, increased seismic activity, and
phreatic eruptions where steam is
released from volcanic vents.
Of course, most of us do not live near
active volcanoes, but many people do,
and these structures remain an important
focus of geological research.
Thanks for watching. Subscribe to my
channel for more tutorials. Support me
on Patreon so I can keep making content,
and as always, feel free to email me.
professordaveexplains@gmail.com