# Ep02 - Intro to Plate Tectonics.txt
Video ID: MuOnqt8O_MY
Lang: en
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MuOnqt8O_MY

---

Hi there, welcome to episode two of the
geology 101 video series. I'm geology
professor Shawn Willsey and this video
series is for physical geology, geology
101. It's aimed for people who maybe had
geology in the past but want a little
bit of a refresher, possibly people that
are currently enrolled in a geology 101
course or learning similar content or
maybe you're brand new to geology and
just want to start with the basics. But
either way, happy to have you on board
here. This course and this lecture
series is modeled after my college
course. The only thing that's a little
bit different is this obviously doesn't
have the in-person lab and field trip
component. But nonetheless, you can
supplement these videos with some of the
other videos on my YouTube channel,
particularly the rock and mineral
series, but also by finding key
videos that might relate to some of the
content we have here. So, thanks again
for joining me. Again, this is episode
two where we're going to introduce the
concept or theory of plate tectonics.
That'll probably take a couple of
additional episodes, but let's go ahead
and get started. So, in episode one, we
learned about the interior of the Earth,
the different layers that make up our
planet. And today, what we're going to
do is look at a a fundamental and
unifying theory in geology. Now, a
scientific theory is something that's
incredibly robust. It has passed
numerous, countless tests and
experiments and it's it's validated.
It's something that works. Doesn't mean
we know everything about how it works,
but it works. And so, it's a little
different than the way we often refer to
the term theory maybe in everyday
society. So, it's a little bit different
than that. So, let's go ahead and get
started here. We'll learn more about
some of these graphics as we go. We'll
learn about this person here, this
individual Alfred Wegener, as well. So,
turn my light back on.
Uh
Okay, so the idea of plate tectonics
really began with this more broad
concept known as continental drift. And
the interesting thing about plate
tectonics is it's really quite a new um
theory or a new idea in geology. Only
within the last maybe 60 years or so has
plate tectonics really uh revolutionized
the way we think about Earth's
processes. So, Alfred Wegener was a
German meteorologist um
and he wasn't necessarily the first one,
but he was among the first that put
together a lot of the ideas, uh looked
at some observations, and came up with
this idea known as continental drift
where all the continents were once
joined into a single uh landmass, a
supercontinent called Pangaea. And he
had plenty of evidence for this this
line of thinking. There's the obvious
sort of fit of the continents, if you
look at especially like South America
and Africa, and you treat them like
jigsaw puzzle pieces, there's sort of a
natural fit uh between the two,
especially if you don't look at the
coastlines of continents, but actually
uh the outer margins or what we call the
continental shelves, um where the where
the ocean really drops off to deeper
levels or that surrounds those
coastlines or those continents. Those
somewhat fit amongst uh many of the
continents. There was evidence in the
form of fossils that we'll talk about
here in a second, glaciers, similar
mountain ranges, and then rock
sequences. So, it was a pretty bold idea
at the time. And you have to go back to
the line of thinking that prevailed at
that time, which was that um
you know, there wasn't a lot of dynamic
processes. There was obviously things we
could observe, but the continents were
thought to be quite rigid. The idea that
that there was movement on such a huge
global scale involving what we find out
later is like the Earth's uh crust and
upper mantle, what we call the
lithosphere, was a pretty bold uh claim.
So, let's look at a fun little animation
here that will explain this in a little
bit of detail. And this is one from a
no longer available as much as it used
to be, but from a publisher or Pearson
had this put together. And I used to use
this in class quite a bit. So, this is
the idea he proposed that the continents
were stuck together into this single
supercontinent called Pangea. You can
probably make out most of the outlines
of the continents there, North America,
South America, Africa.
This is Antarctica, Australia, India,
Arabia, and Europe, Asia, and Greenland
here. So, more or less put together. And
this animation's highly simplified. It's
a a little bit cartoonish, but it but it
conveys the general point. And what he
proposed then is with this single
supercontinent had actually split apart
over time,
eventually separating into mainly two
big continents or land masses, one known
as Laurasia, the northern hemisphere
continents, and one called Gondwanaland,
mainly mainly the southern hemisphere
continents. And that these of course
drifted apart over time. Now, he didn't
know the time frame for these,
but he did postulate that these
continents had separated over some
period of time. So, you can kind of see
where things are moving here and just
kind of following along. So, here we are
about 50 million years ago, the map
starting to take shape, looking similar
to what we see today.
India has not yet docked with Asia at
this point. There's a few little
differences here. Australia is
continuing to move further north. And
then we we arrive at our present day
map, which looks more or less something
like this. So, this is the map
of the Earth that you were born with,
and this is the map of the Earth that
you'll likely die with.
No discernible changes take place within
a human lifetime. But because today we
now know that the not just the
continents, but the plates are moving,
and we'll get to that here in a bit. And
we know which direction they're moving
and the rates or speeds at which they're
moving. Uh a fun thing to do is actually
plug this all into a computer and model
what the future map of the world might
look like. And so, I'll click this one
more time and this will show you what
the map of the world might look like in
another uh 50 or so million years. And
not a lot of differences there, but
there are some subtle things there that
are somewhat important. And so, you can
see um
that the continents, let's go back a
little bit here and then run it one more
time. So,
one thing you can see is the Atlantic
Ocean getting wider, North and South
America drift further to the west. So,
the Atlantic Ocean and the Atlantic
Basin gets larger. So, your flights from
the US to Europe are just going to take
longer in the future cuz it's a bigger
distance, takes more fuel, it'll be more
expensive. Um what are some other subtle
features we saw here in that animation?
Well, Australia
is going to continue to move north. It's
been moving north for about a hundred or
so million years and it's continued to
move north. Let's talk for a second,
Australia's a good point to pause and
talk about how plate tectonics affects
climate and how climate dictates
ecosystems, plants and animals. So,
Australia today, as you probably know,
sits uh more or less straddling uh the
tropics here and so, it sits at a fairly
low latitude. Um the interior of
Australia, as you probably well know, is
is quite hot and is mostly a desert. So,
there's kangaroos jumping around and
dingoes. Um of course, along the
coastline in places, it's maybe a little
bit more uh a moderate climate and the
north coast of Australia is more of like
a a rainforest or tropical climate. But
much of Australia's interior is a desert
and mainly it's a desert because of the
latitude it sits at. The world's deserts
um more or less coincide with this, you
know, 25 to 40° either north or south
latitude. So, the single greatest
control on climate is latitude, your
position north and south on the globe.
Notice where Australia is likely to be
in 50 million years. It's going to be
more or less straddling the Equator. And
so, think about the climates that we
have in and along the Equator, in
Central Africa, in
the Amazon Basin of South America. These
are the rainforests. These are places
where there is exceptionally high
rainfall rates, weathering is very
intense and enhanced, there's thick
soils,
thick canopy of vegetation, and an
entire ecosystem of animals that thrive
in that type of climate. So, just
imagine how different Australia is going
to look in 50 million years when it
moves from this subtropical location to
being right over the Equator. And how
different its plant and animal
communities might look at that time. So,
again, plate tectonics is important cuz
it's a driver of climate and biology or
ecosystems in any given area. One other
thing I noticed here as we ran the
animation is India continuing to plow
northward. Of course, most of you
probably know that in between India and
Asia is the world's largest mountain
range, the Himalayas, including Mount
Everest.
So, this animation, if it's to be
believed, implies that if India
continues to plow northward into Asia,
that those mountains are that are there
as a result of that collision will
continue to be uplifted. And so, Mount
Everest isn't getting any smaller
anytime soon as that collision, which
began several million years ago,
continues into the future. And then
maybe the last most notable thing on
this fun little animation that you might
have seen here, uh if we go back just a
little bit to the again the present map,
watch what's happening over here on the
west coast of North America.
Do you see it? So, there was a piece of
North America that's been shifted off
the margin of the continent and
transported to the north or northwest.
And this is Baja California and coastal
California. Everything west of the San
Andreas Fault. Of course, the big
misnomer urban legend you hear is that
California's going to fall into the
ocean during the next big earthquake.
Well, that's not that's not true because
as we learned in episode 1,
California, along with Baja California,
is made out of continental crust and
continental crust is buoyant. It doesn't
sink. It doesn't subduct. And so, the
the real end result here is that this
part of the continent, everything west
of the San Andreas Fault, is actually
going to move off to the northwest
at some point, possibly become an
island, and then eventually collide with
and dock with Alaska and maybe even a
little bit of Canada here.
And so, it'll be very different there as
well. The nice sort of Mediterranean
climate that southern California
experiences now will have to give way to
a much colder and and wetter
type of climate in the future. So, this
is the idea that Wegener was putting
forth, this idea of
continental drift was what he named it.
And he had some good evidence. So,
there's the some of the fossil evidence
he had. So, we find the exact same
species of some fossils on different
continents. So, you can see sort of the
distribution of a few key fossils here.
This fern, Glossopteris, is found on
five different continents.
You can see some of these other fossils
as well.
And a biologist will tell you that when
you when you isolate and separate a
species and allow evolution and time to
take place, those will eventually evolve
into very distinct and different
species. They're in different habitats.
Over time, they they they will not mate,
and so they will become different
species. They'll develop different
traits and characteristics depending on
their environmental pressures. And so,
having identical species of organisms
that can't cross the ocean doesn't make
any sense. But when you reconstruct the
continents and consider them as a joined
landmass, then it makes perfect sense.
And again, this was some of the evidence
that Wegener was using to put forth his
idea, this idea of continental drift.
There's some evidence for um
glaciers as well. And so, uh when we
look at the distribution from glacial
evidence, and you might ask, "Well, what
evidence do glaciers give us?" Well,
glaciers can give us both erosional and
depositional evidence. So, there's both
the the glacier advancing across a
landscape, scouring it with ice, leaving
polish marks and scratch marks on the
landscape. Um but also, as the glacier
reaches lower elevations and its
terminus, it'll deposit and drop a lot
of sediment. And so, there's a number of
ways in which glaciers can leave
evidence of their existence. And so,
when we look at the evidence of glaciers
uh in the Southern Hemisphere
especially, and maybe looking back a few
um you know, 100 plus 200 million years
ago, um we see that there's glacial
evidence in places that don't make sense
today. Um Australia has no glaciers
today, and yet there is distinct
evidence that it once had glaciers on
its southern margin. Glaciers in
Antarctica, that's okay. We have
glaciers there today, so evidence of
ancient glaciers, uh no problem there.
But again, the the distribution and the
location of some of this this evidence
for glacial activity um doesn't make
much sense until you reconstruct the
continents uh in their best-fit
scenario, and then it becomes one common
polar ice cap uh that's glaciating these
landmasses all at the same time. So,
there's some of the evidence uh in the
form of glaciers.
There was evidence in the form of just
rock types and mountain ranges. So, for
example,
if I took you on a field trip into
northeastern US, maybe Pennsylvania, New
England area, and we look at the rocks,
and we look at the fossils, and the
history of those rocks, and then we fly
across the Atlantic to
the UK or maybe parts of Scandinavia,
Norway,
we can effectively see the exact same
rock types sequences,
layers of rock stacked on stacked on top
of each other, exact same fossils,
and again, that doesn't make much sense
with separated continents, but when the
continents are joined and that becomes a
singular
connected belt of rocks and or mountain
ranges, it makes much more sense. So,
today we can look at the evidence for
plate tectonics and continental drift
and say, well, yeah, like just, you
know, seems pretty obvious. It seems
like a slam dunk. But you have to
remember 100 plus years ago at the time
and the
the the thought process, the the dogma
that existed at the time was very
different. And so, ultimately what
happened with this this idea that
Wegener put together? Well, it was it
was flat out rejected by the scientific
community. And the main problem that was
his his idea faced was it wasn't really
a mechanism. When he was really asked
and
forced to come up with a a mechanism or
a way in which the continents could
move, which seemed preposterous at the
time. How do these huge continents,
which must weigh a tremendous amount,
how do they just sort of plow across the
face of the earth and move? What what's
pushing them or what's pulling them? And
he really didn't have
a good answer to that. He just knew that
the evidence was very much pointing
towards
continents had once been together and
had drifted apart, but he couldn't
figure out what the mechanism was. So,
the idea
pretty much drifted, pun intended,
drifted away at that time, wasn't really
considered um
part of scientific thought process at
that moment. And what happened to our
good friend Alfred Wegener? Well,
tragically in 1930, he's on an
expedition in Greenland
um
and he's out doing research as the story
goes, he gets separated from base camp
during an absolute blizzard, can't find
his way back to base camp, and dies of
exposure.
Um so, another case, you know, and we
have many of these in science of a an
innovative thinker that was ahead of his
time. He He was onto an idea that would
later be validated, um but he died not
being able to see
uh that validation come to pass. And so,
um but we still revere and champion
Alfred Wegener along with uh many other
geologists who helped us move forward
with our thought process. So, what
happened next was um
the idea kind of went on the back
burner. Um a few people kind of looked
at it, but no one really like ran with
it, and no one really went after a lot
of evidence for the most part. Uh and if
we fast forward the timeline in the
story here to post-World War II, uh wars
are always a good way for technology to
move forward. And one of the big advents
coming out of World War II was we had
used sonar, uh sound waves in the ocean
to look for submarines, but also to map
the seafloor. If you're going to creep
around in submarines out here in the
ocean, you need to make sure you know
what the topography's like so you don't
run into a, you know, underwater
underwater mountain or something like
that. And so, in the course of doing
research post-World War II in the '50s
and early '60s, we realized that the
Atlantic Ocean and other ocean basins as
well, had this impressive underwater
mountain chain that ran for literally
tens of thousands of miles up and down
the ocean basin. Uh so, right where you
might think, if the ocean basin's a big
bowl, you'd expect it to be deepest in
the middle, we actually found that it
was shallower there uh than we expected.
And that the mountain range had some
interesting geometry to it. It also had
high heat flow, so the rocks uh at the
bottom of the ocean were transmitting
and carrying more heat than adjacent
areas closer to the continents. And
these areas were sometimes volcanically
active. They produced earthquakes quite
frequently.
Um and so, and then later, as we
developed the abilities to date rocks,
we found that the youngest rocks were
right there at the center, right on the
crest of these underwater mountain
ranges, and that the oceans got older as
we moved away and towards the continent.
So, this got this this really created a
uh a huge dynamic in geology, this new
data coming in, what does it mean, how
can we explain it? And this helped us
dust off some of those ideas from
Wegener and look at them in light of
some of this new data. At about the same
time, we started studying uh the the
magnetic field of the earth and looking
at how that's recorded in earth's rocks.
And so, just a real quick primer on the
earth's magnetic field uh and how that
works. And so, if you're at the equator
here, the earth generates a magnetic
field like a big bar magnet. So, if
you're at the magnetic equator, you can
look at this little diagram here, your
compass needle will be oriented, it will
point north as it should, but it'll also
have, if you look at my little diagram
here with me and uh if this is the the
compass needle here, this pen I'm
holding, um if I'm at the magnetic
equator, my magnetic um needle here will
be oriented horizontally. It'll still
point north, but it's going to be
parallel to the Earth's surface. But as
I move further north, so let's say I
leave the magnetic equator area, and
let's say I'm now in like Florida or
Texas, now it'll still point north, but
it's going to have an inclination or
tilt to it. Now that magnetic needle, if
it's allowed to rotate in
three-dimensional space, it's actually
going to have a little bit of a tilt to
it, still pointing to the north. And if
I continue moving further north, that
needle will continue to increase its
orientation, getting steeper and
steeper, until I reach the magnetic
pole, at which point my little magnetic
needle will be oriented vertically. And
so, what this tells us then is that we
can use the orientation of magnetic
materials that that will be aligned with
the Earth's magnetic field,
we can use that as a proxy for latitude,
how far north or south of the equator
you are. And so, when we started
applying this to rocks, recognizing that
especially volcanic rocks like basalt
have high amounts of iron in them,
there's minerals that are naturally
magnetic, so as they flow out as lava
flows, all that stuff's kind of getting
moved around, but once that lava starts
stops moving,
those minerals, before it becomes
solidified, will orient themselves with
the magnetic field that existed at that
time. And what we found then is that it
looked like some of the continents that
wherever they are today, that they had
quote unquote drifted over time or they
were once in a different location. So,
for example, if we go to a place like
Ecuador, which sits on the equator
today, and we look at rocks 10, 15, 20,
30 million years ago, we find that those
rocks
show signatures, magnetic signatures of
that location in Ecuador, not being at
the magnetic equator, but it being some
higher latitude, some distance away from
the equator. And so, all of this
together was really compelling evidence
for uh that yes, the continents actually
had move have moved and still move. Um
and so, all this was being put together.
Um it was a very exciting time in
geology cuz the the data and the the
discoveries were coming fast and
furious. And surely slowly but surely it
was filling in the gaps of knowledge
that were that existed from back in
Wegener's time. The other thing that
came about during the uh study of the
Earth's magnetic field is that the
Earth's magnetic field reverses itself
from time to time. So,
every day your whole life the Earth's
magnetic pole is the North Pole. If you
take out your Cracker Jack compass
uh and point it and hold it, that needle
will point north. It did it on the day
you were born and it undoubtedly will do
it on the day uh you leave this Earth.
But what's interesting is that that um
that magnetic signature sometimes
flip-flops. And so, sometimes, and we
don't understand all the uh intricacies
of this. This is one of the big um
holes in our knowledge is exactly what
controls Earth's magnetic reversals, um
how often they occur, and some of those
dynamics. But what you can see here on
this upper right uh sort of candy stripe
looking graph is a record going back
about 4 and 1/2 million years of Earth's
magnetism. So, normal magnetism is what
we call North Pole magnetism. Taking
your compass out and your compass points
north. Reverse magnetism would be taking
your compass out and the compass
pointing south. And so, you can see that
over time it's flip-flopped, but there's
not a real clear cyclicity or pattern in
terms of the time component involved
here. All we know is that it flips
and it seems to flip quite quickly
within a few thousand years or so. So,
the time frame it takes for the magnetic
pole to completely reverse itself seems
to be a fairly quick. And so, let me
show you one more animation here that
will help us understand
um how this works. And so, if we It's a
little bit fuzzy, I apologize for that.
Um
but if this is our ocean basin where the
plates spread apart, which we'll get to
in a minute. So, this is where new ocean
rock is created as we have volcanoes
erupting on the seafloor. So, if the
North Pole is the magnetic pole at the
time these volcanoes erupt, then their
little minerals will record North Pole
magnetism. But if it flips to South Pole
magnetism and the volcanoes keep
erupting on the seafloor, then those
that little swath there of rock will
have minerals that record South Pole
magnetism. And then at some point in the
future, it flips again. And when it
flips again, there we go, North Pole
magnetism, these rocks record uh North
Pole being the magnetic pole. So, you
can see that essentially the ocean
basins, which continue to spread and
open,
um are kind of like a tape recorder and
they record on either side of the plate
of the the plate boundary where the
spreading's taking place, this uh
flip-flopping of the pole of the
of the poles, North to South. And this
can only be explained um by having the
ocean basins opening up as this magma as
this lava's erupting here on the
seafloor. So, another huge piece of
evidence that helped
to validate and cement the plate
tectonic idea a little more firmly, this
idea of not just paleomagnetism, but
these magnetic reversals. And so, with
that, uh as As moved into the late '60s,
um
plate tectonics had become
a a
a better accepted and eventually a
completely uh widely accepted theory,
scientific theory. Uh it combined
Wegener's early ideas and observations
of continental drift with some of the
advances that came after World War that
involved seafloor spreading.
Um it explains for the most part where,
I don't know, 90% of all the Earth's
volcanoes are. It explains 90% of all
our earthquakes. It explains many of our
mountain ranges, many of Earth's dynamic
features and processes are very well um
explained by plate tectonic theory.
That's why it's considered a unifying
theory. It actually explains lots of
observations from lots of different
fields and um gives them a common
framework that ties them together. So,
you can see that our Earth is divided up
into a series of plates, what we call
tectonic plates. Some are large, like
the North American plate is quite large.
Uh the Pacific plate is large as well,
but this the way this map projection is
it it looks maybe a little bit smaller
than it actually is. Um some plates are
small, like the Juan de Fuca plate,
which sits off the coast of Washington,
Oregon, and northern California, as well
as southern British Columbia. Some
plates are made of just ocean basin,
like the Pacific plate for the most
part. Other plates are made of both
continents and oceans. But, all the
plates are moving in different
directions, and the action tends to be
along these boundaries. And that tends
to be where the bulk of Earth's uh most
dynamic processes occur. So, if you
think about earthquakes, you think maybe
of southern California, or Japan, or
Indonesia, or the Philippines, or the
west coast of South America. Those are
all earthquake-prone regions, um
and they coincide nicely with these
plate boundaries. If you think about
volcanoes, you might think of Iceland,
you might think about the Andes, the
Cascades,
um
Japan, the Aleutian Islands. You might
also think about Hawaii. So, we'll have
to explain that one. That one doesn't
line up real well. But, most of the
Earth's volcanoes, New Zealand, um can
be explained there. So, what we're going
to do in our next couple of episodes is
dive into these specific plate
boundaries, look at the types of plate
boundaries, look at the processes that
govern at these plate boundaries, um and
what sort of features exist there. And
this I can't emphasize enough how
incredibly important it is to have a
good, solid, basic, but fundamental
understanding of plate tectonics as you
move forward in your geologic studies
because this, um
undoubtedly, is what uh
forms the foundation of our knowledge.
So, you can't really understand
earthquakes well
without having the concepts of plate
tectonics,
um in your back pocket. Oh, you can't
understand volcanoes as well unless you
understand how it relates to plate
tectonics. So, that's our first, uh
episode. This is episode two, but it's
our first episode, probably a
three-parter, I'm guessing, in covering
plate tectonics. So, I hope you have
enjoyed this. Please like, share,
subscribe, uh and look for the next part
coming up soon. I'll get these out as
quickly as I can, but sometimes it might
take a week or so for me to prepare each
lecture episode. Uh feel free to
supplement these lectures with any other
resources you find. You can obviously
Google any number of terms and find
other resources out there that might
help you with your study and
understanding. So, hope that was
helpful. Thank you so much for your
time, and take care.