# Ep14 - Weathering.txt
Video ID: 6H0QMjIe-UM
Lang: en
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6H0QMjIe-UM

---

Hey there folks and welcome to another
episode in the geology 101 video series,
Physical Geology. I'm geology professor
Sean Wily. Thanks for joining me today.
We're on episode 14 looking at
weathering. And so this video series,
the geology 101 series, is based on my
college course I teach. Same curriculum,
same content, same lectures and
classroom discussions that I have. The
only thing missing here, of course, are
the labs and the field trips, but you
can supplement those a bit with some of
my other videos on my channel. So,
thanks again for joining me. Um, today
what we're going to do is look at
processes related to weathering, and
that'll set us up nicely as we go into
our next section on sedimentary rocks.
Up to this point, we've looked at ignous
rocks, how ignous rocks form, talked
about volcanoes, and now we're going to
look at a fundamental process in the
rock cycle, and that is the breakdown of
rocks near the surface, or what is known
as weathering. So, the first thing I
think that's important is
differentiating weathering from erosion.
Those are two terms that I commonly see
people interchange a little bit. And
while seemingly innocuous, there is some
big differences between these two that I
want to highlight. So weathering is
breaking rocks down by various processes
in situ in with the rock at its
location. And so it's breaking rocks
down through whatever process. And then
once the rock is broken down into
sediment, then that sediment can be
transported by a variety of mechanisms.
And those of course are processes of
erosion. So weathering is the breakdown
of rock. Erosion is the transport or the
or the um the removal or um the
mechanism that actually moves that
sediment into some other location. And
there's lots of different weathering uh
processes. We're going to look at a
couple of those today. We mainly divide
those into two sort of groups. Either
physical or mechanical weathering
processes as then we have the chemical
weathering processes. Erosion. Um, we'll
spend more time on each one of these
concepts later in the course, but we'll
look at how sediment is transported just
by gravity when we talk about mass
wasting and landslides. We'll look at
the role that water plays both uh moving
water or maybe in an ocean environment.
We'll look at wind processes and how the
the wind can transport and move
sediment. And then we'll also spend some
time looking at glaciers and the impact
that ice can have on transporting
sediment. So all of these are different
erosional agents with ice, I suppose,
being the most powerful. Uh gravity is
kind of like the common player
throughout them, but ice is the most
powerful in the sense that it can
transport sediment of any size. However,
um ice is the least common. Water is
probably the most common because water's
much more ubiquitous on planet Earth. Um
okay, so let's look at some different
physical weathering processes here. How
do rocks break down with just basic
physical mechanical processes? So, the
first one we might consider here is
what's known as frost wedging.
Basically, as we all well know, when
water freezes, it actually expands. Kind
of a weird substance, water. Uh, most
things contract in terms of their volume
as the temperature drops. And water does
the same thing, I think, until you get
to like 36 38° Fahrenheit, you know, a
few degrees above zero Celsius. And then
once you get below that temperature, it
actually starts expanding. Something
weird that I totally don't understand,
but an interesting phenomenon of water.
And that expansion of water as it forms
ice actually has sufficient force to
actually break rock apart to infiltrate
fractures and cracks and cause those
cracks to widen over time through this
process called frost wedging. Um, it's
really common in mountain environments.
Uh so you got a couple pictures here of
these rocks actually splitting as the uh
frost wedging takes place. It can
actually cause rocks to not only
separate over time but actually topple.
And so ultimately the frost wedging
taking place with this rock in the top
left here might actually cause it to
actually uh fall off this pedestal or
this cliff band here and into the abyss
below. Um so let's do a let's do a fun
little quiz question here um right off
the bat. So, I give you five different
locations here, and I want you to think
about which one of these locations would
be best suited to having frost wedging
as a significant weathering process. So,
go ahead and consider those. Maybe pause
the video here for a second if you want
to give this some time to mull it over,
talk to someone in the room next to you,
see what they think, and then I'll
reveal the answer.
So, if we look at these options here, I
tried to pick places that were, you
know, fairly wellnown. Um, we have
Phoenix, Arizona, Miami, Florida,
Fairbanks, Alaska, Jackson Hole,
Wyoming, and Honolulu, Hawaii. And maybe
the three that hopefully you took off
the list first were Arizona, Florida,
and Hawaii. These are very warm climates
where ice rarely if ever forms. I don't
think, although we could check the
climate records, you know, you'd be
hardressed to find a day below freezing
in either Miami or Honolulu. Phoenix,
Arizona, the town I was born in, um they
do occasionally get, you know, an odd
winter day here or there where there's a
skiff of snow and temperatures below
zero, but it's it's pretty um scant.
There's not a lot of days like that. And
so those locations, while they get
plenty of water, they don't well except
Phoenix, I suppose, they don't really
have the temperatures uh below zero
enough to cause frost wedging on a
significant scale. So then we're left
with Fairbanks, Alaska and Jackson Hole,
Wyoming. And Fairbanks, I think if you
look at the climate data there being,
you know, in the central portion of
Alaska, they have large sections of the
winter time where it it's just cold.
It's below zero for a long time. And for
frost wedging to be significant, we
would want as many days as possible
where we can fluctuate temperatures
above and below zero. And so I think
without looking at the hardcore climate
data, I think Jackson Hole would be the
better choice because I think you're
going to end up with more days in a
calendar year where the temperature or
temperatures are above and then below
freezing as many times as we can go
through that frost thaw cycle. Um that
will make it a much more significant
process. So I think that's the best
answer there. But of course we can uh we
can maybe look into the data there and
see if see if I screwed this one up. I
don't know. I just threw that one
together. Um okay. Okay, so frost
wedging uh again tend to see it in
mountainous regions at in the mid
latitudes of course you know at high
latitudes it can be all the way down to
the coastline sea level um this might be
something you might see. So, as the
frost wedging is taking place in the
rocks up above, uh that dislodges these
rocks. They eventually succumb to
gravity, fall down the slope, and this
pile of angular loose boulders that you
often see on a slope is sometimes called
talis. And so, frost wedging is a
climate dependent process. You need
obviously water um but you also need
these temperatures dipping below
freezing and then rising above freezing
as much as possible. Okay, our next
physical weathering process is um goes
by a couple different names, but I
prefer unloading or pressure release.
And the idea here is that we have taken
a rock that has formed underground under
pressure, brought it to the surface
sometime later, and now that rock is in
the process of actually expanding
outwards because the pressure has been
released off of it. Uh I like this
diagram right here. So if you imagine
this little round mass here is a body of
magma maybe at the time of the dinosaurs
that cools and crystallizes into an
intrusive ignous rock maybe something
like granite. And then if we fast
forward maybe in this case millions of
years later the dinosaurs are gone but
people are around. That same mass of
rock which is now exposed at the surface
tends to expand outwards. The pressure
has been removed from it. So, while it's
expanding outwards, it's breaking into
these concentric layers or these sort of
slabs um that sort of break along the
surface of the rock. And so, here's a
picture from City of Rocks right here in
southern Idaho that beautifully
illustrates this. You can see where the
fractures are. The rock is breaking into
layers, not because the rock internally
has those layers. This is a grrenitic
rock. Um but because as the pressure is
released, it tends to break along these
concentric um these concentric surfaces
that are parallel to the overall uh
surface of the rock layer there. And
this can create over time these big kind
of rounded features we call exfoliation
dome. So here's one near Austin, Texas,
um enchanted rock. Another rock uh
outcropping made out of granitic or
ignous intrusive rocks. So you can see
these slabs starting to break apart.
some thicker pieces over here. But all
that weathering again is part of this
unloading or this pressure release.
Another iconic place where we see this
is in Yoseim National Park in
California. Place like Half-D uh these
grrenitic rocks here formed miles
underground. Now they're at the surface
and so they tend to expand outwards. In
this inset photo in the upper right, uh
ignore the people although they give
this the the photo a sense of scale.
This is up the backside of Halfdome, the
Cables Trail. But look at the rock here.
Look how it's it's breaking along these
these thin fractures that are parallel
to the surface. It's basically peeling
like layers of an onion. It's
exfoliating just like your skin. And so
you could go up here with, you know,
don't do this of course, but if we if we
chipped away and broke away all these
slabs, these seemingly loose pieces and
cleaned this off, uh it would only take
some, you know, number of years probably
for new ones to develop because this
exfoliation or unloading process is an
ongoing and dynamic process. Uh we get
things like root wedging. So just the
growth of organisms in cracks or voids
or pore spaces in the rock as those root
systems grow and develop that can
actually split the rock apart. So you
would think that you know rock versus
tree that the the rock would win. But
this is actually a case where the the
organism the the plant in this case is
able to split apart the rock as it
grows. you know, it starts as a little
seed in a little kind of crevice and
then it it gets watered and germinated
and it starts to grow and over time it
can actually split apart the rock. Um,
so this is considered a physical
weathering process as well, even though
it involves a little bit of a a
chemistry kind of thing. And this is
called salt weathering. I think that's
probably the the the best name I know
for it. It might go by some other names
as well, but it's these holes you tend
to get in rocks. Um, a lot of times
people think they're gas bubbles, but
those would only of course form in
ignous rocks. Uh, and they tend to be a
lot larger than that in many instances.
But this is when we have either salt or
calite or some soluble mineral that has
been transported with water into the
pore spaces of the rock. The water
evaporates, but as the crystals from
that mineral start to grow, it actually
breaks apart and splits the rock apart.
And it can tend to produce this kind of
honeycomb weathering or it's also called
taponi. Um, it's an Italian word. And
this one here, I think, is from Capitol
Reef. A lot of times you see this in
coastal locations because you have the
the salt from the ocean, but even in
inland locations, you can get this as
well. Um, you know, in kind of where I
live here in southern Idaho, the the
Great Salt Lake's not too far away from
some areas. And so, you can get it
transported uh from the salt flats down
in Nevada or in Utah. uh and even in
places like here in Capitol Reef, the
rocks themselves might contain some caly
or some salt, they can be dissolved and
then and then transported with water
later by rivers and streams or just rain
and then reprecipitated and again as
those crystals form that breaks the rock
up into these uh very attractive and
kind of fun to look at holes in the
rock. Um so salt weathering another
physical weathering process. If we look
at our chemical weathering processes,
there's a couple here I'd like to
highlight. So oxidation is a very common
one. Anytime you have iron, anything any
mineral or material that contains iron,
it can readily react with oxygen, which
is essentially just turning it to rust.
This is a this is exactly how you know
something metallic. If you leave it
outside or you're in a very wet climate,
uh something might rust very easily.
This is just oxidation. And this is why
we see in places like Arches National
Park here in southern Utah these
beautiful red rocks, these sandstones
that are um this this reddish or orange
hue. And you might ask yourself, well,
why is it that color? Because when you
look at the sandstone up close, what you
find is that the grains of sandstone are
mostly made out of quartz. And quartz is
mainly a colorless mineral. It's
certainly not red typically. And so if
you looked at under a hand lens or a
microscope, you'd find these mostly
colorless uh rounded grains of quartz.
But what's cementing those quartz grains
together is an ironbearing mineral,
hematite. And so this oxidation process
can both weather the rocks, but it
actually can form cement that holds the
rocks together as well. Um, and so it's
actually the cement in this case that
actually imparts the color we see on
some of these beautiful sandstones and
red rocks that we see in in this sort of
landscape here. Uh, another chemical
weathering process is dissolution.
So remember, one of the minerals we
learned uh was calite and calite along
with a few other minerals is important
because it's soluble. It can be
dissolved in water or even in slightly
acidic water. So when it rains out of
the sky, H2O um that water passing
through the atmosphere picks up and some
CO2 some carbon dioxide uh and it
dissolves it in with the water and forms
this is a carbonic acid. It's basically
a weak acid. So what falls to the ground
after it rains isn't pure water. It's
actually a weak acid. And in the
presence of these rocks that are soluble
like limestone or marble and there's
some others too like gypsum um it can
actually dissolve the rock over time. So
it's chemically weathering um the rock
over time and it might make the the
ground kind of pitted like this. In some
environments it forms caves and that's a
topic we'll study later when we look at
groundwater. Uh in desert environments
it might make the rock kind of uh pitted
but very sharp. When we go rock climbing
on this stuff, you definitely know it
because the rock can be quite sharp on
limestone in these more aid types of
climates. So, dissolution is another big
chemical weathering process. Um, and so
all of our weathering processes are
going to depend on some other factors
that will contribute how quickly they
occur or how quickly they progress. And
one thing is just how much how much of
the rock is exposed. And I love this
little diagram here. So if you take a
cube of rock, you have six sides, right?
Six sides to a cube. That means that the
weathering processes can only really
attack it on those six sides. But if you
take that same cube and break it up into
eight smaller cubes, well, now each one
of these eight cubes has six sides.
That's 48 uh faces of the rock. And so
we've got more area of the rock, more
opportunities for the weathering to
break down the rock. And if you took
those cubes and broke those up even
more, you'd have even more faces exposed
to the weathering processes. So the
point is as rocks break down into
smaller and smaller pieces incrementally
over time, uh the weathering rates tend
to accelerate to some degree. Um this is
also a fun uh photo to consider too when
we talk about weathering rates. These
are two tombstones in the same cemetery.
I think if I remember right, this is
somewhere in the eastern US, maybe like
Kentucky, Tennessee, something like
that. So the tombstone on the left, you
can read everything. Uh the person's
name, date of birth, uh date of death.
Um and then if you look at the one on
the right, it's hard to make out any of
the details there, although you might be
able to pick out right here the same
year of death, 1888. So, assuming these
two tombstones were erected in about the
same year, which I believe they were,
you can see the degree of weathering um
and the difference there between the two
tombstones. The one on the left, of
course, is made out of granite or
something similar to granite, much more
resistant to chemical weathering. The
one on the right looks like it's
probably made out of marble. And so,
they've selected once upon a time marble
as the tombstone rock type. But you can
see how how the chemical weathering
processes have uh rendered this mostly
you know it's definitely hard to read if
not impossible to read just over that
you know 100 plus year increment. So the
type of rock that we see will greatly
impact how quickly weathering takes
place. Some rocks are very resistant to
weathering some are much more uh
susceptible to weathering. You might
remember Bowen's reaction series. We
studied this in looking at ignous rocks
and the order in which minerals
crystallize from magma. But this this
fun little graphic here also has some
implications to weathering. It turns out
that the last minerals to crystallize as
we work our way down Bowen's reaction
series, the low temperature minerals,
the minerals that are stable at these
low temperatures, these tend to be more
resistant to weathering. They tend to um
not weather as quickly as those up here,
the high temperature minerals. these
tend to break down much more quickly due
to various chemical weathering process
processes. So, a fun little um example
there of how this Bowen's reaction
series actually fits in a little bit
with chemical weathering from, you know,
minerals like quartz, which are very
abundant, partly because they're hard
and they lack cleavage planes and
they're common, but also because they're
very resistant to weathering. Quartz is
a a mineral uh that can get recycled
over and over and over from one
environment to the next. Um, other
things that affect the weathering rates,
the climate is a big factor. Basically,
if you have areas with high temperatures
and more precipitation, more moisture,
they tend to have more enhanced uh
weathering rates. You've got more
vegetation. Uh, the vegetation in the
soils can increase the acidity and
everything just speeds up quite a bit.
So, the climate is an important factor
to consider when looking at weathering
rates. And then finally here to wrap up
this episode, um some of the most
fantastic things people see and often
have questions about and things that I
often feel as questions from the public
involve um you know rocks that look like
this. Just these interesting shapes that
ultimately a lot of times the answer to
their questions is something involving
what we call differential weathering.
Basically rock types that are different
and they're the rate at which they're
weathering is quite a bit different. So,
here's me with some students uh many
years ago down along the Utah Arizona
border. This area called Cliff Dwellers
right near um the start of the Grand
Canyon and Le Ferry. And you can see
these big sandstone boulders resting on
these very small pedestals of mudstone.
And so the fact that these sandstones
are much more resistant to weathering,
um they're actually kind of protecting,
it's like a little umbrella protecting
these mudstones, which do get weathered
by surface runoff, but not as readily by
water falling vertically down out of the
sky. Uh same thing here in the upper
right photo. This is Goblin Valley.
You've just got a little bit more
resistant unit on the top there. Uh
probably again a sandstone, fine grain
sandstone probably in this case, and
some mudstone here. So you end up with
this fun little kind of mushroom
capstone looking feature. Uh and a place
like Bryce Canyon National Park is
another great place to to look at when
talking about differential weathering.
These hoodos, these iconic rock
formations that make up Bryce Canyon
National Park. Um if you look at these
closely, you'll see that there's sets of
vertical lines going through a lot of
the cliffs here. And there's also sets
of horizontal layers as well. And so the
weathering of these hoodos is
fundamentally related to the rock type.
It's this is all limestone, kind of a
dirty limestone as it has some sediment
in it. Um but then these vertical
fractures or what we call joints and
then the beds, the layering that's
inherent to the rock as well. Uh and if
you just add in all the free thaw
cycles, Bryce Canyon sits at, you know,
8,000 ft. um plus the heavy monsoon
rains that they get. They've just got
quer
combination of factors in terms of
inherent rock characteristics and
external climate and weathering factors
uh that lead to the formation of these
fun little hoodos. So hopefully that
helps a little bit. There's obviously
with a lot of these topics you can deep
dive. This is just geology 101. So we're
just hitting some of the basic processes
here. So, but hopefully you've enjoyed
this uh episode and in our next episode
we'll tackle the sedimentary rocks and
sedimentary processes. Now that we've
learned how sediment is created, we want
to learn a little bit more about how
sediment gets deposited, um how it gets
laid down and and actually turns into
rock. So, thanks for joining me on this
episode appreciate your support of the
channel. There are ways to donate to
this geology education series. There's
links underneath the video description.
There's also the little thanks button
down to the right of the viewer. Please
make sure you're you subscribed and
liked and do all those good things and
appreciate your time. Take care.