# Ep32 - Mass Wasting Basics.txt
Video ID: YBfrIB1WVPA
Lang: en
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YBfrIB1WVPA

---

Hi there and welcome to another video in
the physical geology geology 101 video
series. I'm geology professor Shawn
Wily. Thanks for joining me today. In
episode 32, we're going to look at some
of the basics that govern a really
important process and that is mass
wasting. A process that affects humans
uh all the time in a variety of
locations. In our subsequent episode 33,
we'll look at the exact types of mass
wasting uh processes that are involved.
Um, this geology 101 video series is
modeled after the classes I teach here
at the college. No tuition required. It
is the same curriculum, the same content
that I cover. Uh, the only thing you're
missing here are some of the field trips
and labs, but you can probably
supplement a lot of that by looking at
some of my other videos. And I'll put
some videos in the description that go
along with this topic. Um, okay. So,
let's go ahead and get started. So, mass
wasting is often what you would, I
guess, commonly call uh landslides.
Although, as we're going to see, there's
a lot of different types of ways in
which slopes can fail and move.
Different speeds involved. And so, it's
a little bit more um involved than just
calling everything a landslide. So, what
we're looking at here is um the downhill
movement of various earth materials due
to gravity. Basically, when slopes fail,
that's what mass wasting is. We're going
to see this can occur in a variety of
settings. Steep slopes, gentle slopes,
um dry climates, wet climates. It's an
important process in the grand scheme of
erosion of transporting uh material. And
again, it can be fast or slow. There's
some that happen almost instantaneously
within a few seconds at the most and
some which can take years to sort of
culminate. So, we got a little eye candy
there with a um a really nasty mass
wasting uh event there in Bolivia in
2011. Let's look at some of the the
basics here though regarding mass
wasting. Of course, it's all driven by
gravity. And so gravity is this
universal constant and this is what
actually causes slopes to fail. Now
looking at it from sort of a a physics
point of view, uh if we look at just a
block here on an inclined plane on a
ramp, we actually have um the force of
gravity, this red area, red arrow here,
this vector is really just the two
components. It is what we call the the
shear stress or what we might call the
driving force here. So the driving force
or the shear force and then this other
force here the normal force is the
resisting force. And basically it's a
balancing act between um the material
moving or staying in place. And
depending on some of the the factors
here and how strong these vectors are
that'll sort of dictate whether the
slope stays in place or whether it
actually moves. We sometimes call the
relationship between the sheer force and
the normal force or the um resisting
force. We sometimes call that sheer
stress or shear strength. Um, so you
could sometimes talk about the sheer
strength of a of a soil or a slope at
any given location. Notice here on these
diagrams that as we increase the slope
angle from left to right, look what
happens to our vectors to our arrows
here. The the force of gravity um stays
the same, but the different forces
involved. the the sheer force or the
driving force uh becomes longer and more
pronounced as the slope angle increases
and the normal force or the resisting
force um gets shorter as the angle is
increased. So there's this constant
balancing act here that's going on with
any given slope. Even though it's it's
it's uh every given slope, but even
though it's angle might may not be
changing, um some of these other factors
are changing a little bit. And so to
explore that in a little bit more
detail, uh let's head down the hall to
the classroom for a little
demonstration. We'll do a little quiz
along with it and learn more about slope
angle and slope
stability. All righty. So, we've moved
down the hallway to the classroom and
we're going to explore this concept of
slope angle and the role that water
plays in slope stability with a little
demonstration here and also a bit of a
quiz for you to handle. So, what I have
here is an old uh cookie sheet and in my
beaker here I have a uh container a
beaker full of dry loose sand. And what
we're going to do is pour out this dry
loose sand on the cookie sheet. As I do
so, I will attempt as best I can to
operate the camera and also pour the the
sand out in a nice steady consistent
manner and in the same location. So, as
we do this with the dry loose sand, what
I'd like you to do as part of your
little quiz here is to make a prediction
about which of these three
um cross-sections you think best
demonstrates the pile of sand that will
I will end up with. Will it look like A,
which is a much steeper pile of sand?
Will it look like B, a little bit more
moderate? or will that pile of sand look
a little bit like sea? So, those are
your three options. So, go ahead and
think about that and consider it and
then let's go ahead and get right to it.
So, I'm going to try to do this while
operating the camera. So, what we're
going to do here is pour the sand out.
trying to like basically what I'm trying
to do here is pour the sand out such
that in a nice slow controlled manner
such that I get all the sand grains on
top. I'm trying to get every sand grain
to go to the tippy top. Now I'm going to
pour out a little bit quicker here and a
little faster. Just pretend this is like
time lapse and sped up a little
bit. And what we can see here is if we
kind of come and look at it in
cross-section view. Hopefully you can
see that there. It looks a lot like um
option B on our handout. So with this
maybe more moderate angle here, this is
maybe a a 25 maybe 30 degree angle or
so. And I contend that no matter how big
the pile of sand is, if I had a dump
truck just, you know, dropping a bunch
of sand in my classroom here, that that
angle, that cross-sectional angle for
the sand would be the same regardless of
the size. So that's what dry loose sand
looks like. But let's go a little
further. Can we get the sand to look
A or anything like
C? Think about what we might do there.
So for A, a lot of times my students are
like, "Hey, you got to add some water to
it." And so let's go ahead and do that.
Let's grab our our beaker of sand here,
come over to the sink, get the water
going, and there you go. Oh, I've added
water. This is where the students say,
"Oh, no, you got to add more water than
that." And luckily for the students, uh,
I am an expert. I took a class in water
sand
relations, ratios. Just kidding. That's
a bit of a lie. And so, what I'm doing
here is I'm adding sand. We're watching
the sand kind of uh, percolate down to
the bottom of the beaker. So, the water
is infiltrating the sand vertically.
It's finding the pore space. Um, it's
working its way down under the influence
of gravity, filling in all the available
pore space. What I'm trying to do here
is get the sand
wet, but not too wet. And we'll look at
how that might uh play a difference
here. So, it looks like we pretty well
just about might need to tap it a little
bit there. Yeah, it looks like all the
sand is pretty well wet at this point.
And now what I'll try to do, this might
be where I need to have three hands
here. Um, let's see if we can get this
oriented just right. I might need to
pause it here and get this oriented. So,
hang
on. Okay, so I think I've got this
situated. We've got our nice pile of dry
sand, but what we're trying to do is see
if we can make our sand pile up to a
much steeper angle. Basically, what we
saw in a that very steep pile. So, we've
added water to the beaker um and to the
sand here. And so, let's see if we can
get that
here. Tada. Oh, is that going to
collapse? Hopefully not. So, there you
have it. There's like a nice little pile
uh of sand. Try to look at it from the
side view. Maybe you've done this before
playing with sand as a kid or something
like that. And again, this is just like
sand castles, right? So this is the idea
that if we have water here, it actually
acts as a cohesive agent and it binds
and holds the tiny grains of sand
together. So we all know making a sand
castle, you know, you're looking for a
certain amount of water um with the sand
in terms of how you mix it. If you have
too much water, you might end up not
being able to achieve this. But this is
like the perfect or pretty close to the
perfect ratio of water to sand that
allows the sand to maintain a much
steeper angle. And so let's see if we
can to kind of round this out. Let's see
if we can also achieve C here. So what
we might
do is um let's see here. Let's take our
sand. Just kind of mash it up here.
Let's take the rest of
this. Get this out. Science is
messy. Okay, so there's the rest of our
sand. Okay, so we piled up all our sand.
I'm going to go ahead and turn
this cookie sheet around and actually
put it here on a slope. So now I've
actually added the cookie sheets at an
angle. the water is in the sand, but
it's actually acting more as a cohesive
um glue that's holding the particles
together. So then what we'll do to make
this fun and engaging for our student
audience is we'll pretend this is like a
real slope uh and we'll put a few little
Monopoly houses up on the hill. And now
if this is the situation, maybe this is
stable for some period of time. Um, but
of course, uh, one of the big factors
that that drives mass wasting is the
amount of water in a slope. So, we'll go
ahead and add some water. So, notice as
we add water to the slope, no water is
coming down the cookie sheet. It's all
still being absorbed by the sand. The
sand is able to
uh hold that water because there's still
available pore space. So, let's just
keep going with the water up here on the
slope. We might add quite a bit of
water. There's still quite a bit of
available pore space in here. But
eventually, at some point, what we're
going to see here is at some point we're
going to reach a level of saturation.
Basically, there is no more uh pore
space for the water to go into. And of
course, that's when we see the water
pushing aside the sand grains. And now
the material is actually flowing and is
destabilized. And so we end up with a
very low angle of repose. Obviously I've
inclined this on the cookie sheet, but
we could have achieve achieved the same
thing if I'd kept that cookie sheet
level. And now we can say that you can
get this kind of geometry to the pile of
sand if it's completely saturated. So
again, to review, we started with a dry
pile of sand with an angle maybe about
25 to 30°. When we added a little bit of
water, a certain amount of water, the
water was able to bind the particles
together, forming a lot of cohesion and
allow us to achieve much steeper angles
to our pile of sand. But finally, when
we added too much water, the water
pushed the grains apart, was no longer
acting as a cohesive um entity, and so
it actually separates the grains and
creates a very low angle such as we see
here. And now we have a big mess of sand
on our cookie sheet there. So, pretty
sweet stuff. So, uh that's our little
classroom demonstration. Let's head back
to the
lecture. Okay. So, we've learned a
little bit through our demonstration
about slope angle. Basically, as slopes
become steeper, they tend to become more
unstable. Just as a general rule, the
language we use regarding slopes in
terms of how steep they can become
before material starts to move or slide,
that's something we call the angle of
repose. Uh, and it varies depending on
the sediment sizes. Also, depending on
the shape of the grains in that sediment
or that soil and in general as the as
the size of the particles gets larger,
we see that the angle of repose
increases a little bit as well. Um, as
the sediment or material becomes more
angular in terms of its shape, you can
also achieve higher angles of repose as
well. And that's because those particles
have those little angles and sharp
corners that can grab and add a little
bit more friction. And so if you've ever
been past like a sand and gravel plant,
you might have seen something like this,
a conveyor belt uh just carrying the
aggregate or the sediment up to the top
and then getting piled there. And as it
piles more and more up on top,
eventually it slides or cascades down
the side. So if we measure the angle
there of that pile, that would give us
the angle of repose for that material.
Let's look at some other factors that
govern uh slopes as well. We've seen the
role of water a little bit, but just to
kind of put a fine point on it, um we
know that a slightly uh a slight amount
of water or in in sediment will allow it
to be cohesive. So water actually acts
as a bit of a glue or cohesive material
holding the particles together um in
small quantities. But when we add more
water that water then is forced into the
pore spaces between the particles
separating them and then we lose all our
cohesive um our cohesive properties.
Then the material basically flows. Uh
it's not no longer able to maintain any
sort of uh structural stability. And so
that's what happens when we get too much
water in our sediment. Some other
effects related to water. Water is
heavy. Water adds a lot of weight to the
slope, which can be an important factor
when we're looking at slope stability.
Uh certain materials like clay actually
expand when they're wet. And so they
actually can decrease slope stability to
some degree. And then depending on the
type of rocks you have and some of the
chemical properties of the water, we
also know looking at the one of our
previous episodes on chemical weathering
that you can actually dissolve some
rocks as well. And so you can actually
cause rocks to chemically weather
depending on some of the exact
properties there. Some of the other
factors that govern slope stability
involve vegetation. So vegetation um
typically native vegetation acts as a
good slope stability agent. It will keep
uh the the water will be absorbed. Uh
the canopy of trees and leaves or the
canopy of leaves and branches will act
as a way to dissipate water that's
falling out of the sky. So it it
decreases the erosional energy of that
material. Of course, when we lose the
vegetation, maybe in a big wildfire or
something like that, or maybe just
stripping, you know, deforestation, any
sort of activity that removes
vegetation, um we set the stage
typically for enhanced slope
instability. Now, that vegetation's no
longer to help with um absorbing the
water and keeping the slope more stable.
And so there's a host of reasons why uh
keeping vegetation on on slopes is
generally a good idea. But for reasons
both u natural and sort of human-caused,
sometimes that's not the case or at
least not possible. Um other things that
are important are just the types of
materials you have, the actual material
making up the slope itself. Um usually
if it's loose material like loose
sediment, it's typically weaker than
consolidated material like solid rocks.
Um although you can have fractures in
rocks or uh pre-existing weak layers in
rocks like bedding and sedimentary rocks
or foliation the layering we see in
metamorphic rocks and those structural
weaknesses can um act to cause the slope
to become less stable even in solid
rocks. Uh, one of the things here with
clay materials as we've talked about is
it becomes quite um it loses a lot of
its sheer strength when it can become
saturated and it can flow um and cause
mass wasting events kind of like the one
shown here. In other places where we
have rocks, we might look at actually
the orientation of the rocks. Turns out
that the how those rocks are oriented
can play a big role in determining how
stable slopes are. We particularly are
aware of and a little bit uh wary of
something called a dip slope. So if we
have layered rocks, these could either
be sedimentary rocks or these could be
foliated metamorphic rocks. Even in
rocks like granite, you might get uh
fractures running through the rocks. And
if any of these planer fabrics like
bedding or foliation or fractures is
more or less parallel to the slope, that
sets up what we call a dip slope. And
these are often sites or can be sites at
least where slopes instability occurs
and slopes tend to fail. This slope over
here to the left of the person is not a
dip slope because the slope angle which
kind of comes off here to the left is
not parallel to the dip of the layers
here. But this uh slope here kind of
shown in this olive green just to the
right of the person is a dip slope. And
then we go up the ridge here. But this
is not a dip slope. So, we'd expect this
this slope here to potentially be
problematic depending on specific things
about the climate, what the rock layers
are made out of, and some other factors.
But, this would be something to be a
little bit concerned about if you're
ever looking at property or any sort of
location that's on a dip slope. And then
up here, uh this is from the Canadian
Rockies, but you can see these layers
dipping to the right here. So, this
slope uh on that side of the mountain
would also be a dip slope. And there's a
good example of a dip slope failure from
uh northwestern Wyoming just near
Jackson Hole in the Tetons. This
happened in 1925 and it's called the
Groant slide. And what we had here
geologically was a bed of sandstone
sitting over uh basically a shale.
Shales are clay rich. And during a
really uh wet uh spring after a heavy
snowpack that's completely saturated the
sandstone. And so the water percolated
down through the sandstone through those
pore spaces, but when it hit that bed of
shale or clay was no longer able to move
down because clay is very impermeable.
So that water basically saturated that
contact between the sandstone and the
shale or clay there caused it to lose a
lot of its sheer strength and it slid
down. that whole chunk of sandstone on
the hillside slid down into the valley,
damned up the Groant River and created a
lake, the Grant Lake, which still exists
today. So that slide material um is
still there damning up the lake. And
what that looks like today, you can
still see the scar on the mountain, even
though that's a good hundred years or so
old. You can see the difference in the
color of the trees. Uh the old growth
trees are darker green. These newer
trees that have grown on top of the
landslide here are lighter green, but
there's the lake. There's the big scar
up on the hillside. So, we've looked at
some of the factors that govern uh mass
wasting. And let's round up this episode
by looking at different triggers. What
are some things either natural or human
cause that actually cause slopes to
fail? Uh the photo here is actually from
2006. This is down in northern Utah. You
can see the damage to the home here. Um,
this was when a slope uh located
adjacent to the property became
completely saturated, mobilized, moved
down the hill, moved out across the
flats, ran into the house. The house
actually has a basement and window
wells, and this slurry of muddy debris
went down into the window well. Um, and
there was a four-year-old girl that that
muddy debris sort of uh slammed against
the wall and she ended up uh breaking
her femur and having some other minor
injuries. Just to show you some of the
impact and some of the hazards
associated with mass wasting. So,
usually heavy rainfall or snowfall is
probably one of the most common
triggers. Basically adding more water
and completely saturating the the
sediment within a slope. it not only
adds um the water not only adds weight
to the slope but it reduces the sheer
strength of that slope. Volcanic
eruptions can be part of the equation at
times either erupting and adding ash or
having a volcanic landscape uh coated in
ash which is very uh easily mobilized
during mass wasting events. Um so that's
part of the equation. At times,
earthquakes can cause shaking that can
destabilize slopes and cause them to
lose um their stability and fail and
move. Uh and then the last one, the one
we've talked about here, of course, is
wildfires. Removing that vegetation,
removing uh all the benefits that
vegetation produces in enhancing slope
stability. Once that's gone, we
sometimes see um mass wasting events
that are pretty um rampant in those
areas. So, these are just some natural
triggers, by no means all-incclusive,
but just some food for thought. Let's
turn now to uh human cause triggers.
What are some things that we do in our
world uh on the landscape that can
enhance or possibly cause mass wasting
events to occur? Well, one thing we do
when we build roads, and this isn't uh
universal, but it's pretty common in a
lot of locations, is when we have a
slope and we need to put a roadway uh
maybe up and down a canyon or something
like that. What we tend to do is we cut
into the slope uh in order to create a
level surface for the roadway and then
we take some of that material that's
been removed. We dump it over here on
the downhill side um and then we compact
that material and put the roadway there.
And this is a process known as cut and
fill. We cut into the slope and we take
that fill, that material that's been
removed, and we add it here. And by
don't get me wrong, I'm not saying that
these um engineering methods or
construction methods are 100% doomed to
failure. I'm just saying that there's
some inherent flaws and there's some
things to consider and we sometimes do
see mass wasting events uh in these
locations because these areas have been
disturbed in this manner. Notice that
locally by cutting into the slope, we've
changed the natural angle of repose. The
natural angle of repose came down like
this. we just cut into it creating a
steeper angle in this location. The
other thing we're not quite sure of and
that can be questionable at times is how
well this this removed material now is
connected to the underlying material.
How, you know, what what level of
adherence is going on to those two
different types of material. Um, so road
building and road construction can be a
trigger for mass wasting at times. Uh we
talked about the removal of native
vegetation. Maybe not a wildfire though,
which which you know by the by its name
implies that it's naturally occurring,
but maybe um deforestation, clear, you
know, clear cutting an area, clearing
out a swath of land maybe for a a
subdivision or something like that. And
we go sometimes and put in grass or
maybe we plant non-native vegetation
that demands higher amounts of water.
And by doing so, we change the equation
and we change some of the dynamics
involved with that slope. And when we
build buildings, we often use a similar
method to this for building
construction, cut and fill. So in this
case, uh maybe someone buys some
property on a hillside, they want to put
their house there. So we cut and remove
some portion of the existing slope
material. We possibly rather than you
know uh trucking that material out which
is costly and you got to have a place to
put it. We just keep it on site uh and
put it down here on the downhill portion
of the slope. There is the fill and now
we have a little bit bigger pad in which
to build our home. And again, don't get
me wrong, I'm not saying that every
house built like this is doomed to utter
failure and collapse. I'm just saying
there's some inherent um design issues
and some considerations to look at when
this kind of uh technique is employed.
So some other considerations here as
we've um cut and with this cut and fill
method related to homes or buildings um
if we have a situation where the water
table is high maybe as they're cutting
down into make the pad here they
intersect the water table and there's a
little spring and maybe the homeowner's
excited that it will be you know nice
little water feature on their property.
Um, but remember that water table is
telling us that everything below that
point, all this material down here is
saturated. All the available pore spaces
in these rocks or in these sediments is
completely filled by water. And so that
would be something that I would
definitely um consider and want to look
at in a little bit more detail before uh
I I pulled the trigger on either
building this home or potentially buying
this home. So, we've got the seeper cut.
We've got the water table, the fill. Um,
in this case, I've chose chosen to give
the person a nice little lawn, which
will mean that they need to pump water
onto the property to grow their grass
most likely, depending on where they are
in the world. And that will add more
water to the slope and more weight to
the slope. The house itself introduces
uh more weight. And so again, these cut
and fill methods of construction just
need to also um involve some engineering
considerations or just looking at the
slope in a little bit more detail
because every time you do this, you are
increasing uh the risk of some sort of
mass wasting event taking place taking
place. So that's our episode for this
time. In our next episode, we'll look at
different mass wasting features. We'll
learn to classify mass wasting features
based on how they move, what types of
material they move, and then we'll do a
little quiz to round out that section.
But thank you for your support of the
channel. Hope you've enjoyed this video
and this series, and we'll see you next
time. Take care.