# Ep33 - Types of Mass Wasting Processes.txt
Video ID: ZNbkFw1zS-w
Lang: en
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZNbkFw1zS-w

---

Hey there crew and welcome to another
episode in our physical geology geology
101 video series. Thanks for joining me.
I'm ge geology professor Sean Wily.
Today in episode 33 we're going to look
at specific types of movement of slopes
and mass wasting features. Basically
when these slopes fail and there's
movement what are the specific types of
features and processes that are
involved? That's what we're going to
focus on today. You know, generically in
in the sort of general media, these are
often called landslides, but we can
define them more specifically by they be
how they behave and some of their
characteristics. Uh, as always, this
video series is modeled after my college
course. It's the same content, the same
curriculum. The only difference here is
uh we don't have a lab component or the
field trip component, but you can sort
of supplement some of those experiences
by watching some of my other videos.
Now, in looking at different mass
wasting features and processes, there's
all sorts of great videos on YouTube and
other places on the internet, but I
didn't want to I wanted to tread lightly
on any sort of copyright issues. And so,
I've chosen not to show some of those uh
videos, but I'll link to a few of them
in my video description. So, if you want
to see examples of some of these types
of behaviors of slope failure, you can
check out my video descriptions. And
I'll also put a few videos in there of
other mass wasting features that I've
covered previously. Um, so as we go
through each one of these, I I'll also
provide some case studies and some
examples. Obviously, there's lots of
different examples, not just, you know,
regionally, but worldwide of these types
of features. And so, you might think of
some other ones as well. and then we'll
wrap up our little um lesson today with
some quiz questions and see what you've
learned as you've um been engaging in
this video. So, let's go ahead and get
started here. And let's just start with
the idea that slopes fail and move with
one of three typically just to kind of
broadly classify them types of behavior.
Either material that's falling uh free
falling and so we're going to call that
type of motion um if we see that type of
feature we're going to call that rock
fall. So imagine material either free
falling off of a cliff or maybe tumbling
down a steep slope. But the point is the
material's airborne for some period of
time. We can also look at how um
material moves if it moves down a
defined surface. So if the whole
material is moving intact as one
coherent mass down some defined surface,
we're going to have two different types
of slides. We're going to have excuse me
slumps which are also called rotational
slides. Then we also have this something
called rock slides which are
translational slides. And we'll compare
those two types of movements here in a
minute. And then our final type of
motion just again broadly classifying
these mass wasting features is what's
known as flow. So here the material is
not a coherent mass. It's more kind of
mixed up usually because there's much
more water present. And the three types
of flow uh features or processes we'll
look at are debris flows, earth flow,
and creep. So let's go ahead and get
right to these. Go through these one at
a time and then we'll do that little
quiz there at the end. Um so let's start
with rockfall. Maybe the simplest one to
uh understand. Um steep cliffs and
fractures within those cliffs. Those are
places where water might infiltrate. We
might get freeze thaw cycles in the
rock. Those fractures widen
destabilizing the rock mass itself. And
then occasionally we can get rocks
falling off of that cliff. It might be
also induced by an earthquake or some
other type of phenomena. And so what we
see here are the rocks that are
occasionally falling off of these
cliffs, tumbling down this slope. And
these big angular boulders here are
accumulating on this slope. And we call
this material collectively talis. These
big angular boulders that are the
products of rockfall. Uh and these this
would obviously be one of the fastest
types of mass wasting processes. Um, the
USGS has some fun little animations.
They actually break down rockfall into
two types of movement, but I've chosen
to kind of lump them together. So, they
recognize one type of movement, which is
called a topple, which is basically uh
where you get a cliff that basically
rotates forward on the unaded uh exposed
side and then basically falls down to
some lower elevation. Just sort of a
tipping over kind of like um you know,
like a domino falling over, if you will.
And again, this could be a frost action
type of thing um where the where it
destabilizes that rock face. The other
one they talk about is what they call
rockfall, but I've chosen again to lump
these together. That's how I presented
in class. Uh, and this would be just,
you know, gravity acting on loose rocks
on a slope or maybe rocks that are
dislodged by frost action or something
and then sort of tumbling and uh rolling
and moving down slope. Um, but still
either way, the common denominator here
is we're looking largely at solid rock
material. We're also looking dominantly
at um material that's at least airborne
for part of its um journey down the
slope. So, a couple examples here. And
again, I have some local examples from
where I'm located here in Twinfalls, but
you might think of other examples as
well. I just stuck with what I know. So,
locally here in Twinfalls, we have the
Big Snake River Canyon, this prominent
geological feature in our area, and
there's a road that heads down into the
Snake River Canyon. And actually, it had
had some rockfall issues there. I think
in 2006, some of the rocks, the basalt
up above had fallen down onto the
roadway. Um luckily no one was hurt but
a lot of people used that roadway for uh
walking just kind of for fitness to walk
up and down the hill there. Cars go up
and down the road. Um and so the city
recognized that there was a hazard there
and there you know the geology there
plays a big role because we have this
basalt up above. Then we have this soft
looser material just below this
prominent uh basaltic cliff here or this
old lava flow. And this is a a very soft
set of sediments that was a soil horizon
between this lava flow and another one
that's just below the snow here. And
this is what's known as a paleosol. But
the point is this is softer material.
It's not a cohesive cliff of basaltt
from top to bottom. There are
discontinuities and weak layers here. So
this is the way it looked about six or
so years ago. So the city embarked on a
big project, rockfall mitigation
project. And here's more or less how it
looks now after they went ahead and um
put some measures in place. So you can
see what they've done here. You can see
the underlying basalt here and the
overlying basalt and then this softer
layer here. That's still some of the
exposed paleosol there. But over here on
the left side of the photo, what they've
done here, and it's actually, I think,
a, you know, I'm not an engineer, but it
seems to be a pretty good remedy to the
situation, at least in terms of
mitigation, was take a bunch of these
angular boulders, um, place them sort of
a terrace at the slope grade, more or
less. Uh, so it's not necessarily a
vertical wall. It's actually sloped back
a little bit this way. And then they've
put some, uh, like concrete or shockrete
material kind of around the margins
here. And then as you move to the right
um where the the paleosol kind of thins
out a little bit and it becomes more or
less just a big cliff is they put
netting over these rocks recognizing
that hey some of these rocks might fall
but they've got this netting here which
is anchored near the bottom and that's
meant to keep the rocks from actually
tumbling onto the roadway. So is it
preventing rockfall? Absolutely not. But
is it um maybe helping the situation and
controlling it or mitigating it?
Certainly, it seems to be doing that
pretty well. So, that's just a local
example here of rockfall. Uh another
example, this is in more northern Idaho
or I guess at least west central Idaho
near Riggins in Salmon River. They had a
big rockfall event there about 5 years
ago that blocked off US 95, a pretty
major highway in that part of the state.
And this is occurring in um a
metamorphic rock unit called the
Lightning Creek Shist. And so they had a
big section fall onto the roadway. And I
remember cuz we we were going up there
for a river trip and you had to be
detourred uh quite a ways around this
thing. It was, you know, a substantial
time detour to get around this rock
fall. And I think it took them maybe a
week or more cuz they had to figure out
what was going on with this rock here.
There were still some unstable areas and
they had to really take a close look at
this shist. You can see um the slope
there. That's the foliation or the
layering in the shist. So there's a
little bit of a dip slope issue going on
there as well where the the way the rock
is layered in places is somewhat
parallel to the the slope itself. Okay.
So let's look at our next type of mass
wasting movement and that's what we'll
call a slump or some people prefer to
call this a rotational slide. So
generally what's involved here is soil
and sediment versus rock. Although you
can get this in rock as well. So this
one works in both. Um and the difference
here is the failure surface is along a
curved plane. So the material is moving
down slope as an intact entity more or
less all one block. Um but it does so
along this curved surface. And so what
you get from this is this sort of
stairst step appearance here up at the
up at the head of the slope or the head
of the uh of the slide feature. Um so
this stair step kind of geometry here is
very characteristic of these slumps. You
can see the one here uh of this um I
guess cemetery in Bolivia from 2011. Uh
there's the the main headscarp there,
the breakaway point that reveals the the
the plane of failure. Um and then you
can see how it steps down a little bit.
These are common when something at the
bottom of the slope has caused the slope
to destabilize. Could be ocean waves
crashing into the bottom of the slope.
Could be new road construction. Maybe
it's a river. But a lot of times it's
something that's destabilized the bottom
end where the support lies. And
obviously water can always play a role
in these as we talked about last time.
And then the whole slope sort of fails
and moves uh down in this fashion along
this curved surface. So it's a shallow
surface. It looks like a fault
fundamentally, but it's not a
penetrative feature that cuts down into
the earth. It's it's uh somewhat
confined to this near surface uh area.
Um so here's one I found that was a
pretty neat example from Horny UK. So
you can see the uh the homes here at the
trailer park here. This is the ocean.
And then you can see this section of
cliff face here that actually has slid
down. You can see that grass section has
broken free and moved towards the ocean.
You can actually define where that kind
of comes through on this side and then
probably over here somewhere. It breaks
back this way. So you can actually see
and presumably um again you'd have the
wave action uh undermining the the the
toe of this slope which causes this to
fail and move down. So, a nice example
there of a slump. And then I thought
another good case study would be this
area in Leighton, Utah, where I used to
live, uh, and actually went to high
school, Leighton High School, um, from
2006. So, this was a house, and I'll
show you some more pictures here in a
second. House that was actually on, you
know, flat ground, but further into the
backyard and beyond their property,
there was a significant slope, a north
facing slope. 2006 was a very wet year.
heavy snowpack and um a wet spring and
that's saturated the the soil and the
material there. And so you're looking at
that that stairst step pattern there
right through the lawn. You can actually
see it curving. If you can see through
the fence there, you can see it curving
off uh and cutting towards the backyard
of this adjacent house here just to the
east. Structurally in the home, you can
see some of the damage that took place
within the home with these cracks and
such here. Uh, let me show you just some
images from the Utah Geological Survey
from this incident. So, you can see the
road here, the homes right here along
Sunset Drive, and then that main scarp,
that crack through their backyard that I
showed you, uh, is where this yellow
line is here. So, that was all sliding
down into this canyon. But, there was
one home in particular that sustained
the brunt of the damage and was
basically condemned. you know, the
property was um unsit unfit and not safe
for human habitation and so it was
condemned. They ended up bulldozing it
and that property uh is no more. So,
some of the other damage there, you can
see again those cracks that were
developing uh through the backyard.
That's the same view I showed you there.
Um this one you can you can see some of
the tilt of the the deck there. So, that
the deck was actually tilting out away
from the home. Um, you can see the as a
reference you can see the the horizontal
line of the edge of the like rain
gutters here on the adjacent home. And
to get a sense of how tilted this deck
is on the backyard, you also can see the
scarp right here near the bottom as
well. Um, and then further down the
hill, there was more escarments on the
hill themselves on the hill itself that
showed it was still moving down there.
So, this is an example again of a slump.
Um, very common type of mass wasting
feature. Uh, and again, the property was
condemned, bulldozed, no one can buy
that property or that lot. I'm sure the
adjacent homeowners property value has
gone down quite a bit. Um, and that's
why mass wasting is such an important
topic for folks to really, I think,
educate themselves on so they can make
good decisions uh, as homeowners um, for
their communities. Looking at rock
slides, a little different than a slump.
So instead of moving along a curved
surface, the failure is a planer
surface. And this is common where we
have um either some feature in the rock
that lends itself to this type of
motion. Could be bedding planes, could
be foliation and metamorphic rocks, or
it could just be fracturing. It could be
something like granite or any other rock
type that has pervasive fractures in
them that allow this to be a plane of
weakness. And so this would involve
mainly rocks here, like solid earth
materials. And again, virtually any rock
type could have a rock slide in it. It's
very common though in in a lot of
sedimentary rocks or any rocks that have
layering already existing in them. So
here's a 2020 rock slide on Washington
Highway 11. And then what the um crazy
thing is is I I as I was doing a little
bit of work for this and that I found uh
on the internet that basically a few
days ago as I'm taping this on April 26,
2025 uh there was another event. So
another rock slide on this same stretch
of roadway. I don't know if it's exactly
in the same spot um but you can see so
this was from April 23rd when the actual
rock slide took place. Um little bit of
an aerial view there. So you can see the
highway just shut down. You can see how
steep it is there as well. But going on
um in the article they mentioned here uh
talking to Kate McMicholson, a landslide
expert with the Washington Geologic
Survey, and she says the geological
units in that area are dipping toward
the road, which means landslides can
fail along that slope. So again, classic
uh dip slope there. And then finally,
just for for some fun, uh I thought I
would check it out because I wasn't
familiar with the area. So, I went to
this part of Washington. So, this is
north of uh Seattle, um between Seattle
and Bellingham. Uh and here's this
coastal road. It comes up through here.
And then that slide took
place somewhere over in here. But the
reason I'm bringing you in here is you
if we go to street view, you can
actually go in here and look at the road
cuts in the rock and see that there's
clear it clearly looks to me like
there's a a significant dip slope.
There's some feature. You can also see
the layers going the other way. So
there's fractures or some other fabric
running in a different direction. Let's
go down maybe to the next road cut and
see if it's as helpful. Um, but there's
definitely some layering in the rocks
there that lend themselves to
instability. And so it's no surprise
that this area has had uh these rock
slides here. So again, you can see that
steep layering coming down towards the
road level there. So I think the the
street view is I think kind of helpful
to me to see exactly what's going on
here. And I don't know if these are
sedimentary or they look like they could
be like lowgrade metamorphic rocks like
a slate or a filite or something. So
that's um rock
slides. Uh we've looked at our rock fall
and we've looked at two different types
of slide features. So now let's look at
various types of flows. And let's start
with debris flow. So, a debris flow is
when we have a significant um water
event, usually heavy rain,
thunderstorms, could be something else
though, could be something like snow
melt or whatnot. But basically, we've
mobilized a lot of that material down a
pre-existing channel. So, it's coming
down a valley. It's coming down a gully
or some low area. uh but it's mobilizing
a lot of that sediment and rock and
debris, logs and such and then those are
carried down. So here you can see one
from uh California in the Feather River
River Canyon. Now in 2021 they had some
big wildfires in this area. So a lot of
debris flows are very common in an area
after there's been a wildfire. you burn
off all that vegetation, then you get a
heavy uh water event like a rains
thunderstorm, and that can easily
mobilize and and transport large amounts
of sediment. So, it's it yes, it's like
a flood, but it's more like a slurry of
rock and mud and debris. And you can see
here where it came down, cross the
highway, and then fanned out here into
the river. And you can see the logs and
the big big boulders um in there as
well. Uh here's another kind of case
study for where this occurred. Again,
going back down to Utah, northern Utah.
This is uh southern Utah County. But you
can see this muddy material that has
moved through this small subdivision. Uh
to give you some perspective here, you
can see some of the cars like this truck
here buried up past it, buried up past
its axles in mud and debris. Um, so a
really significant event there, but
again something that should have been at
least somewhat foreseeable by looking at
the re the local topography where the
drainages are, where the drainages uh go
as they come down to the mountain front.
And this was another case of a post
wildfire debris flow. Uh the mountains,
we're kind of looking from the Wasach
Mountains down into this neighborhood.
The drainage that produced this is just
off to the left, but they'd had a pretty
good wildfire there uh I believe the
year before. So, a couple of uh photos
related to that event. So, we've looked
at that photo there. Here's some of the
mud and debris uh from this debris flow
in 2002.
Um, you can see some of the damage to
the homes. The mud being spl as the mud,
this muddy slurry came down and hit the
houses, how far it splashed that mud up
onto the homes themselves. Same thing
here. Um, and then this one's
interesting here. A lot of the homes had
basements and in some instances the the
debris flow, this muddy slurry actually
went down into the window wells broke
the window uh and went into actually
went into the home which is um you know
more significant damage in that regard.
Um you can see the damage to it looks
like in this case it pushed the car into
the garage door. You can see the garage
door uh bent and buckled there. uh more
damage here to some of these homes. So,
um pretty incredible. And then a bit of
an aerial view there um of one of these
events. Okay, so those are debris flows
and I'll put links to all these things
I'm showing you down in the description
in case you want to check any of this
out a little bit more on your own. Um
let's go to the next one. Earth flows.
So, earth flows are a little bit
different. Instead of the movement of
slope material being down a canyon or
any sort of existing ravine or gully in
this instance, we actually have a slope
that's been saturated and it's mobilized
because it's it's basically um so
saturated it's actually flowing. It's
failing. So you can see that in the
animation here. You just basically
develop uh a detachment point on the
slope that comes down. A lot of times
they're somewhat hourglass shaped like
this. Not always. You can see that a
little bit here as well. Kind of fans
out at the bottom. Maybe a narrow
constriction in the center and a little
bit broader area up here at the scarp
where it detaches. These tend to be I
mean we're using some big general
parameters here, but tends to be slower
in terms of velocity than a debris flow
because they're a little bit more
viscous, but don't they don't always
have to be. Um, and so these are earth
flow events. Um, here's an example here.
You got a little ranch here. I think
this is from Northern California. And
you can see this this section of the
hillside here that's completely
detached. And you have all the grass and
the soil that has actually flowed down.
Uh looks like it's taken out part of the
fence here um nearby. And then here we
have a a secondary a smaller earthflow
event uh noted um just right adjacent to
that one. Uh and then our last one here
is creep. So creep's a little bit
different. And it's a it's uh the
slowest of all the mass wasting features
typically as the name would imply and
it's this very slow movement and you
know it typically doesn't cause you know
fatalities or injuries or anything like
that but it can progressively cause uh
property damage successive and pro and
um you know recurring property damage
over the long term. And here's how it
works. Um let's go with the freeze thaw
method first. So when this would be all
in soil, right? So soil has moisture
water content in it. And if you're in a
climate where it can freeze, well, when
the when the soil the water in the soil
freezes, it moves up perpendicular to
the slope. So imagine here's the slope
here. Um, and let's say as it freezes,
it expands. So it moves up just a small
amount, but then when that soil thaws
out, it moves straight down. And if you
imagine the next cycle of freezing, so
it's moving perpendicular to the slope
back up to this dotted line here. and
then thawing coming back down. If you
just keep doing that over time, there's
a an incremental movement down. There's
a there's a a steady downslope movement
of that slope. And what you end up
getting sometimes are these uh soil
ripples. You can get damage to the
foundation of your home. Um, if there's
anything built on vertical structures
built on a soil that's undergoing active
creep like these telephone poles or
trees or headstones or fence posts or
whatever, those can get progressively
sort of bent and tilted over time. Um,
so but I think the one thing that you
know usually will give this away
especially in um more vegetated areas is
often the trees. So the trees have this
sort of pistol butt shape to them. This
curved nature here that indicates that
that slope is actively moving in the
downhill direction. You know, albeit at
at a fairly slow rate, right? The tree
will grow vertically, but as the slope
moves, uh if the tree is able to keep
pace with that growth or that movement,
excuse me, with its growth, then you end
up getting these these curved tree
trunks. If the slope movement is so is
too fast for the tree then that the tree
gets sort of pushed over or tilted. Um
but these trees are very much telling us
that uh this slope is undergoing active
creep. So those are the different types
of mass wasting processes or features.
Uh so hopefully you have a good
understanding now of how we classify
these types of movements. Um and to wrap
up here, let's go ahead and do do a
little quiz. So, we'll just do a couple
of questions here and see how you do.
So, let's start with this one here. Um,
so you can see the rock material and you
can see the diagram showing which way
things are moving. So, go ahead, take a
stab at this one. Maybe pause the video
if you need to, if you need a little bit
more
time. And let's go ahead and figure this
one out together. So, we've got this
rock material. Uh, it used to be here
where the dotted the dotted outline is.
And now the material has moved down to
this point. That would indicate it's
falling, free falling through the air.
So that of course would be rockfall A.
How'd you do on that one? Hopefully you
did well. Let's do another one. So here
we have um a different situation. So go
ahead and pause the video and take a
stab at this one and we'll answer
it. Okay. So let's look at this one
here. So we can see the original
position of this slope was shown by the
the dotted line here. Uh but now the
slope has moved down to this position.
So it steps down up here at the head of
the slope. We can also see because we're
in a cross-section view that the failure
surface is this curved surface here. So
we have uh movement along rotational
movement along a curved uh uh detachment
point here. So this would be a slump or
a rotational slide. good example of a
slump or rotational slide. Let's go to
question
three. So, go ahead and pause the video
if you need a little bit of time on this
one, then we'll go ahead and answer it
together. So, in this case, we can see
we have a nice cross-section view. We
can see we're dealing with solid rock
with uh pre-existing fractures uh and
weaknesses. Maybe it's bedding or
foliation that run through the rock. But
the main uh structural feature here are
these lines that run parallel to the
slope. So we have a dip slope and then
we can see that that has caused movement
and so this chunk of rock which was
attached here has moved down this planer
surface and so this would be an example
of a rock slide. So C is our answer
there. And then finally question number
four, our last question. Go ahead and
pause the video if you need to spend
some time thinking about that
one. So, in this case, we have a
hillside. Uh, no obvious drainages
there. We can see that the material has
moved down. Looks like it's in more soil
kind of sediment, earth material. But
here, the material has actually moved
down. Uh, looks like it's kind of like
liquefied. It's not stayed intact. it's
broken apart and it's flowed out uh onto
this lower surface at the bottom of the
slope there. So, this would be an
example of a earth flow, which would be
answer D. So, hopefully you did well on
those quiz questions. I hope you've
learned a few things about mass wasting
features, the processes involved. Again,
I'll put some video links in the
description, and if you want to check
these out in action, you can watch a few
of those and uh hopefully have a better
grasp of this concept. So, thanks for
joining me. Appreciate your support of
the channel. And we'll see you next time
on another episode of the Geology 101
series. Take care.