# Ep34 - Stream Basics.txt
Video ID: PjzSy6fMt08
Lang: en
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PjzSy6fMt08

---

Hey there team and welcome to another
episode in the geology 101 physical
geology video series. I'm geology
professor Shawn Wily. Thanks for joining
me today. Here in episode 34 we're going
to look at how rivers and streams work.
We're going to look at the basic
processes that govern the behavior of
moving water across the earth's surface.
And in a future episode we'll look more
at the landforms that uh running water
creates. Talk a little bit about floods.
This geology 101 video series is modeled
after my college course. It's the same
curriculum. It's the same lectures, the
same content. The only thing you're
missing is the lab or field trip
components, but you can supplement those
a little bit with some of the other
videos I have here on my channel. And
I'll be sure to link a few of the more
relevant videos to this video
description in case you want to see some
application of the things we're talking
about here. So, uh, let's just jump
right into this. So, we're going to be
looking at how water works at the
Earth's surface. And so, that kind of
ties us back to the hydraologic cycle,
which I'm sure many of you are familiar
with or which is uh pretty easy to
understand. Um, so basically water is a
finite resource on planet Earth and it
gets recycled from one reservoir to
another through a variety of processes.
Uh so for example, you might look
outside today and maybe it's a little
cloudy, maybe it's raining, maybe it's
snowing, and that precipitation then
falls to the ground. Some of it seeps
into the ground and becomes what we call
subsurface flow or groundwater. That's a
topic that we'll tackle in a future
episode. Some of it though runs across
the Earth's surface, runs over the
surface through rivers and streams
downhill. That's the part of the
geologic cycle or the hydraologic cycle
that we're going to focus on today. Um,
and then as that water works its way
downhill, it eventually ends up at some
location. Maybe it's a lake, maybe it's
the ocean, where that water can then be
transferred or or moved uh from a liquid
state back to a gas state, either
through evaporation or through
transpiration through plants. Uh once
that water vapor in a gas state goes up
into the atmosphere, it can then
condense back into liquid water uh get
moved from one place to to another and
then eventually fall as precipitation.
So just a simplistic view of the
hydraologic cycle. Again, we're going to
be focusing on rivers and streams. I'll
probably use those two terms somewhat
synonymously. I think we all probably
have a connotation that a river is a a
bigger surface water entity and a stream
is smaller, but the processes are the
same. And I probably will be flip-fpping
those two terms, but realize that they
they stand for one thing uh regardless.
So let's start with looking at the
concept of a drainage basin. So rivers
and streams capture water from a given
area depending on the topography in that
region. And this is what we call a
drainage basin. So you can see here we
have two distinct drainage basins, two
river systems that are each capturing
water. they have their own tributaries
or smaller uh streams that feed into the
larger stream system. Um and those
drainage basins are divided or separated
by high topography. This is a lot of
times is like a mountain ridge or a pass
that divides one drainage basin from
another. So these drainage basins are
what feed the river with its water. They
include all the tributaries that feed
into that river system. They can also
include groundwater. Groundwater can be
moving through the ground, discharging
at a spring that goes into the river
system. And so we'll explore that more
in a future episode. But let's take a
look at a specific drainage basin. And
let's look at the good old Snake River
drainage basin here in southern Idaho.
And so this area here shown uh in the
shaded area delineates all the area for
the Snake River system. So this is every
drop of water that falls in this area uh
typically well eventually makes its way
into the Snake River minus you know
whatever evaporates out of the system.
But if it stays as surface water or even
groundwater it makes its way into this
system. So, the Snake River uh properly
starts here in northwest Wyoming near
Yellowstone National Park, flows south
past the Tetons, uh takes a westward
turn into Idaho, and then flows through
the Snake River Plane uh for a good
duration here, past a lot of the big
communities in southern Idaho. As it
makes its way to the Oregon border, it
starts flowing north, cutting through
Hell's Canyon, which is a scenic area.
And then up here near Lewon and where
the Clearwater River joins the Snake
River, it turns into WA southeast
Washington and then it terminates right
here because the Snake River joins a
bigger river system, the Colombia River.
And the Columbia River system takes off
from this point, goes downstream, heads
west through the Columbia River Gorge,
and ends up in the Pacific Ocean between
Oregon and Washington. So this entire
area here, which you can see the numbers
here for how large this drainage basin
is, um is pretty significant. It's not
by no means the biggest drainage basin
on Earth, but for the western US, it's a
significant drainage basin. You can see
the relative size of the tributaries are
somewhat shown by the uh the size of the
font. So the Salmon River is a is a a
major uh tributary into the Snake River
whereas something maybe like Salmon
Falls Creek down here is is a much
smaller contributor to the system. But
it's divided from other drainage bases
by this high topography. This is
actually um the border between Idaho and
Montana are these high mountain passes
and peaks that run along the border
here. So that's the idea of a drainage
basin. Let's now look at how streams
velocity changes and just look at this
concept of velocity. So velocity of
course is speed or distance traveled
over time. So how far the the water
moves over some unit of time. We
typically use seconds for that. Here in
the US we use feet per second, but you
could also use meters per second. Works
just as well. Um and let's consider two
cross-sections across the stream. Let's
start here with a here we have a
straight channel, right? The river is
running straight across the landscape
when we look at it in map view. And if
we look at it in cross-section view,
that stream channel maybe looks
something like this. And we tend to see
the fastest moving water here, right
down the center of that channel. Uh the
water along the banks of the stream and
along the bed of the stream are in
contact with the the ground. And so
there tends to be more friction there.
So the water tends to move a little bit
more slowly. Maybe it's working its way
over the rocks. Uh the the the sediment
that's along the bed of that channel.
Also notice that this
um straight channel has a fairly
symmetric uh look to it. Now, this isn't
always true, but this is generally more
true than not that you might get a more
symmetrical channel here where the
stream is flowing uh along a straight
path. As we watch the water though go
into uh this bend, this meander of the
stream, things change quite a bit. That
fast flow is actually on the outside of
the bend. So basically as the water
comes in, that fast flow comes into the
bend basically runs right into the
outside bend. And so we tend to see the
fastest flow along the outside of the
stream uh bend or or meander. And
consequently, this the slower water
tends to be on the inside of the bend.
Um and so this actually affects the
shape of the channel. We get a little
bit more asymmetric shape to the channel
with the deeper water and the faster
moving water over here along the outside
of the bend over in this area. Um so
velocity of a stream is important. Um
even for folks recreationally like for
example I enjoy doing a lot of
whitewater rafting and this is something
you learn in guiding a boat is let's say
you know I'm I'm coming into this the
stream this way and I don't know exactly
what hazards might be down here. Maybe I
can hear the roar of a rapid down here
and I want to come into this somewhat
cautiously and maybe scout it out. So
rather than put my boat on the outside
of the bend, which would put me in the
fast flow and kind of send me whipping
around this bend, um, and maybe I
wouldn't have much time to either pull
over and scout it or really assess what
the river is doing in this section. Uh
instead of doing that, which would be a
little bit reckless, I might choose
instead to uh enter this section of the
river on the inside of the bend where
the water is slower uh and I could pull
over to the side easier or I could get
out of the main current a little bit
easier and I could move my way through
this slower section of water and have
more time to be able to observe maybe to
scout out the river, see what hazards
exist there, uh and then make a decision
based on on what I see. So velocity of
in a stream we've seen changes along its
its width u but also changes along its
length when as you go from upstream
locations to downstream locations. Uh so
this is velocity and let's now look at a
real sort of section of rivers. This is
just a a screenshot from Google Earth.
This is the little Brazos River in
Texas. You can see the flow of the river
kind of coming around this bend or
meander. Again remember that the fastest
moving water is pretty much right where
my blue arrow is. But if you just extend
that along here, that's going to
eventually run into the outside bend.
And of course, it's going to be
deflected by the the banks of the
stream. And so this is where we see the
fastest moving water along this side of
the stream. And because of that, because
the water's moving faster, it's able to
uh strip away sediment, rocks along the
edge of the stream and then transport
those. And whenever we transport
sediment, that's something we call
erosion. So this tends to be a more
erosion dominant region of the stream.
And then on the flip side, on the other
side of the stream where the velocity is
quite low, this is where the sediment
the river is carrying is going to be
deposited. It's going to settle out of
the water column to the bottom of the
stream. And this is where we get
deposits of sediment like this big uh
chunk of sand and mud you can see down
here. We'll later get to in the next
episode we'll talk about what landform
features these are and give them some
fun names. But for now, this is some of
the basics here that's important to
think about. Notice here you can see the
the the landscape has sort of been cut
into. There's some steep embankments
along the margin of the stream whereas
over here we have a much more subdued
topographic feature uh where this low
velocity zone has deposited some of the
sediment. So that is the concept of
velocity. Let's now turn to another
important concept with streams and that
is what's called gradient. So gradient
is basically how much the stream is
dropping as you go from an upstream
location to a downstream location over a
given distance. And you can think of it
a lot like the slope of a line. Think
about those good old days back in math
class where you had a graph. You had a
line on the graph and you had to figure
out what the slope of the line was. Um
and so we can treat that with those
simple concepts of uh rise over run. So
we can look at how much the stream the
water is dropping vertically uh over
some distance. So the rise the the the
vertical change excuse me over the
horizontal change what we call the run.
So it's the vertical drop over some
distance. Um gradient's always changing.
So, as we move from one place on the
stream, upstream or downstream, it it's
constantly changing
um in places. And let's go to a fun
example here again locally here in
southern Idaho. Although there's other
lots of great examples one could use.
And what I've done here is I've just
picked a section of the Snake River,
which runs through this region here of
southern Idaho, just north of Twin
Falls. And for this purpose, I went from
uh about the Hansen Bridge right here.
So, this is one bridge over the river.
And I went downstream to the west
through this amazing landscape carved by
the Bonavville flood um to the Pine
Bridge here. So, you can see the area of
the stream or the the length of the
stream that I've uh outlined in blue.
And Google Earth does lots of fun things
uh that you can do here. So, one thing
once you create a path or in this case,
so I've traced out the the path of the
river through the Snake River Canyon,
uh, and once you trace out that path and
save it, um, you can actually put in an
elevation profile. So, notice down here
at the bottom, let me get my head out of
the way a little bit there. Um, we have
a profile of the river. So, you can see
on the map where I'm at with that big
red arrow. So, I'm starting at the
upstream end near the Hansen Bridge. You
can see the elevation there, and this is
all in feet and miles. So, uh can
convert that as needed, but you can see
as headed downstream, the water levels
dropping as we work our way downstream.
Uh there's a significant drop right
here. Uh then the stream is has a very
low gradient, very slight gradient. Then
another very large drop right here in
this section of the river. Uh then it
has another pretty uh low gradient.
Little bit of a drop there. And then
that low gradient continues all the way
down to the bridge. So this is the
profile. This is basically the
topographic profile, the cross-section
of the Snake River from about the Hansen
Bridge down to the Pine Bridge. So I
just wanted to show you uh kind of how
that looks in profile. So let's explore
this specific profile in a little bit
more detail
um and actually calculate the gradient
of the Snake River between those two
points there. So here I've just cut I've
just uh screenshotted that same
topographic profile. Um this is an odd
place though. This part of the Snake
River is not you know does not behave
like a typical stream. Um but I think
this is still kind of instructive. So if
we think about the end point of the
stream and the initial point here, we
can actually connect those with a line
and we can figure out what the average
gradient is. So the gradient that we're
interested in here is from two given
points. So it's you can define this
however you want to. You could do a
gradient between two closer points. You
could do the whole Snake River system
from uh where it starts to where it ends
up. It's just whatever you define it.
But for us in this instance with this
example, we've just chosen this uh eight
or so mile section about 11 or so
kilometers of river to figure out the
average gradient. So how do we figure
out the gradient? Well, we need to
figure out the elevation at the starting
point, the elevation at the ending
point, and subtract those. That'll give
us the elevation drop. And then we would
divide that by the distance. And so my
profile here has all the information I
need. I'll put that up here for you both
in uh English units and metric units. So
here we have the elevation drop about
511 ft between those two bridges on the
Snake River or 156 m. That's the the the
vertical drop of the river over a
distance of just over 8 miles or about
13 km. And so when you divide those out,
depending on which units you want to use
here, you get a gradient of about 62
feet per mile, which means that the
river on average is dropping every mile
about 62 feet in elevation. Doesn't mean
that it does it every mile. In fact, if
you look at some of these sections where
it's very flat, it's dropping very
little if if at all, but we have these
two big significant drops here. Uh in
metric, it's it's it's similar. So about
a little under 12 m per kilometer. Every
kilometer you go down the Snake River,
it's dropping vertically on average
about 11.7 m. So the big two drops
there, if you're not familiar with this
area, we have two uh significant
waterfalls on the Snake River, Shashonne
Falls and the actual Twin Falls with the
the the feature that the land or that
the city is named after. And so even
though we have those two distinct drops
there, we can figure out the overall
gradient along the stream between
between those two points. So that's how
you figure out gradient. Uh gradient is
important because it tells us a little
bit about, you know, the stream
dynamics. You know, if you have a a
steep gradient, you might expect more
rapids and cascades, more turbulence in
the water versus something that has a
much more gentle gradient. So let's turn
over now to our third uh stream
characteristic that's important and this
is called discharge. And discharge is
basically how much water is moving
downstream for every unit of time. So
maybe every second in this case. And
here in the US we use cubic feet per
second. You can also use cubic meters/s.
Just any volume. So a cubic foot would
be a cube that's measures 1 ft by 1 ft
by 1 ft. So, it's how much of that
material is moving downstream. Now, this
one's really important because this will
tell you a lot about how much water the
stream is carrying. So, again, from a
recreational point of view, like as a
whitewater rafter, this is incredibly
important. Um, there's river sections
where I want to know if there is a
greater amount of water moving down that
stream segment uh versus normal, right?
I maybe I ran it two years ago at a
certain flow and now I want to run that
section of river again but it's going
has more water maybe it's twice the flow
now that presents new hazards and new
obstacles and changes the dynamics of
the river pretty um marketkedly and so
this is the idea with discharge or
stream flow. Now the way we figure out
discharge of a stream is we have to know
the cross-sectional area. So here's a
stream here. This is the profile view
here in front. And the stream channel
probably is very irregular. Um probably
isn't, you know, very geometrically
um pleasing to the eye. But what we can
do is just break it into little chunks
or what we call subsections. So notice
this river's channel has been divided
into a bunch of rectangles. And
rectangles of course have a simple area
component where you just need to know
the length times the width or in this
case the width and the depth. So if we
know the width and the depth of all
these little subsegments or subsections,
uh we can add those up. Now that's not
probably not perfect, but it gives us a
pretty close approximate
um representation of the area of the
stream, how much cross-sectional area
the river is occupying as it flows
downstream. The second thing we need is
the velocity. So there's simple things
we can put into the river like uh flow
meters. Um, or you could do something
simple like, you know, throw a a tennis
ball in the river and see how long it
takes that tennis ball to move some
given distance, right? Maybe 100 feet or
100 meters. How long does it take to
move downstream? Simple ways you could
estimate velocity. So, the discharge of
the stream, again, very important. This
is what uh entities like the USGS are
constantly monitoring in real time, the
discharge level. If you get more rain or
more snow melt, that's going to uh put
more water into the stream system,
that's going to mean that the river
rises. So, it's going to have greater
depth. The river might also spill out
laterally. So, it would gave it greater
width. So, notice with the formula here,
if you change any component of the area,
you're going to increase if you increase
any component of the area, you're going
to also increase uh the discharge. Um,
so discharge is always changing
depending on how much water is moving
downstream in a system. So those are
some of the three big components related
to streams. Let's kind of put those all
together now um and just look at how
things change typically from an upstream
source to a downstream source. Now this
is totally generalized. Does every
single river follow this pattern of
behavior? No. But this is generally
true. So typically what do we see with
the gradient of a stream? Typically the
gradient of a streams start up in higher
topography what we call the head of the
stream. And so the gradient tends to be
steeper there. And as that stream system
moves down slope towards its mouth uh
the gradient becomes less steep. And so
here's just kind of a little graphic
here showing the gradient is greater and
it kind of decreases as we get closer to
the mouth. What happens to the depth and
the width of the stream and the
velocity? Well, they start out pretty
small. That stream might be something
you could just hop over here up in the
mountains. Very small. It doesn't carry
a lot of water, so it doesn't have a lot
of volume. Um, isn't very wide, moves
fairly slowly, isn't very deep, but as
we move downstream and more water is
added to that through tributaries, uh,
we would expect all those things to
increase. So all these parameters
increase in the downstream direction
with the one difference here being the
gradient which starts high or steep up
in the mountains and then becomes less
steep as you move down towards uh the
mouth of the stream. Okay. So our next
component and then we'll do some quiz
questions here at the end is base level.
base level is incredibly important for
how the stream evolves over time and
what sort of landscape it creates. So
here we have a beautiful picture of
these narrow deep canyons in
southwestern Idaho. This is the Bruno
River Canyon. In places it's 1,000 ft or
over 300 m deep. It's not very wide. And
these are very much uh the consequence
of changes in base level. And I actually
did a video on this uh canyon that I'll
link in the video description that might
be helpful as well. So base level again
is just the lowest point that the stream
can erode to. So for the Snake River,
its base level is the Colombia cuz
that's where it goes. That's its
destination. Uh if we look at some of
the tributaries to the Snake River, like
let's say the Salmon River, what is base
level to the Salmon River? Well, it's
the Snake River cuz that's where it
flows. That's its lowest point. Um, the
Columbia River goes all the way to the
ocean. So, its base level is sea level
or the ocean. And lots of rivers and
streams do go all the way to the ocean.
And so, we sometimes think about sea
level as being ultimate base level. But
sometimes you can have localized base
levels. You might have an area or a
stream system that doesn't go all the
way to the ocean. and maybe it ends at a
lake or if you think of a place like um
I don't know like in northern Utah those
streams in northern Utah all flow into
uh a low confined basin with no outlet
that's the great salt lake. So that
would be the more localized base level
and streams are always adjusting to
changes in base level. Base level is not
constant. Even something like sea level,
which would seem to be fairly constant,
actually moves over time, especially
geologic time. Um, and so there's always
changes in the land. The land's being
pushed up, maybe the land's going down,
base levels rising, base levels falling,
and the streams are always responding to
that um in some way, shape, or form. And
so, let's explore that in a little bit
more detail. And what I have here for
you are some simple little stream
profiles. So, let's say we have a stream
that starts at point A. So, this is like
a cross-section view looking at the
stream's gradient. Stream starts here at
point A up in the mountains, flows down
to its mouth here at point B. Okay? And
let's say that we actually do, we're
going to change something here. We're
going to change one of these points
here. Let's say we change base level
such that it drops. Okay? So, there's
been a drop in base level. Could be sea
level dropping, could be a lake draining
away, um, whatever the case may be. So
base level has dropped. So now the
stream which starts at the same point
doesn't end at point B. It actually
flows now to point C. Look and see
what's happened here. That the slope of
that line that we had originally is now
much steeper. And so now with a steeper
gradient, think about what might
accompany that in terms of like you know
what's actually taking place on the
ground uh with that stream. Because that
stream has a steeper gradient. It's now
going to erode and cut into the
landscape. It's going to carve a canyon.
This is exactly how we get uh some of
the the great canyons on Earth. Even
canyons so impressive we might call them
grand like the Grand Canyon. Um so this
is entirely part of the story of the
Grand Canyon is a a drop in base level.
Well, what else could change with with
base level? Well, let's say we start
with another stream. Okay, same same
concept. Starting at point A, ending at
point B. the head of the stream, the
mouth of the stream. What if in this
case base level rises? Well, now the
stream is going up to this point here.
And so now look at the gradient of the
stream. Now it's no longer as steep as
it once was. It's less steep. It's more
gentle. And so the stream's going to
slow down. It's not going to cut down
into the landscape. Instead, it's going
to fill in the landscape. It's going to
what we call a grade or deposit sediment
on that landscape. So we would end up
with deposition being the primary
process associated with a rise in base
level. So those are two fundamental
changes there where we've we've moved
base level down or we've moved base
level up and we change the gradient. We
change some of the dynamics of the
stream and over time we end up with two
very different landforms. Well, what if
we keep base level constant? What if I
told you we can do the same thing
without changing base level? Well, the
only way to make this work is not to
change something at base level, but to
change something up at the head of the
stream. So, what if we had tectonic
uplift of the mountains or the region
where the head of the stream starts?
Now, notice we still end up with that
same steep slope. we still end up with a
a steep gradient which again would cause
the river to cut down and erode into the
landscape. And what if you did both?
What if you had the uplift happening at
the head of the stream and a base level
drop uh down here at the mouth of the
stream? Think about how aggressively you
could cut and carve into that landscape
and make an impressive canyon. And that
is part of the story of the Grand Canyon
right there. And then finally here uh
again we'll start with the same line A
to B and instead of moving base level at
all instead of uplifting the headarters
what if we cause the headwater region
this area up here to subside or lower
its elevation. Notice now we have a
gradient for that stream system that's
less steep. And so it's going to be just
like this one here where instead of
erosion and down cutting, we're going to
see deposition and what we call
aggradation or building up of sediment.
We're going to keep depositing sediment
in that valley and on that stream and
we're going to build up the land from
the bottom. So just some fun things to
think about in terms of base level. You
might start to think about um different
ways in which base level can change um
again naturally through different
processes.
Okay, so let's do our uh quiz questions
here to wrap up this episode. So here is
your first quiz question. So let's say
we have a dam that's constructed across
a river. And as you construct that dam,
you impound the water uh behind uh the
dam to form a reservoir. So the stream
gradient above the dam is now blank,
likely resulting in blank. And you have
five options here. So go ahead and pause
the video so you can think about this
and answer the
question. Okay, let's go ahead and talk
about this. So it's just exactly like we
just went over with base level. That dam
across the river has risen the stream's
base level, right? The stream used to
flow down to some other destination
location. But by constructing the dam
upstream of the dam, we now have created
an artificial new base level. So by
bringing base level up, that's going to
cause the stream gradient to be reduced.
So it's not as steep as it was
previously. And because that is not as
steep, we're going to see sediment being
deposited there. So our best answer
there looks like was B. B was the
correct answer. Reducing the gradient
and that would result in the deposition
of sediment. All right, how'd you do on
that one? Hopefully you did well. Let's
do one more click or one more quiz
question here. Uh this one, a little bit
of numbers and a little bit of uh
quantification. So this one you're going
to calculate the discharge of a stream.
So I have some information for you about
this specific stream. It has a
cross-sectional area of about 60 square
ft. And I apologize, these are in uh all
English units, but just change it to
meters if you want to and just change
these to cubic meters/s. It's all the
same. So 60 square ft, the stream is 40
m long. It has a gradient of 3 ft per
mile and it has a velocity of 10 ft per
second. So given those that bit of
information, go ahead and see if you can
calculate calculators are allowed here.
Uh the gra excuse me, the discharge of
this stream. How much water is it
carrying? Go ahead and pause the video
if you need to take a
minute. Alrighty, let's go ahead and
work this through together. Well, this
one's a little tricky because you might
have been looking at all these numbers
and maybe you were overwhelmed and maybe
you checked out already. Um, well, as we
look at these numbers, welcome to
information overload. You don't need all
of this data in order to figure out the
discharge of a stream. The discharge of
a stream is the area times the velocity.
The discharge of a stream, do we need to
know that it's 40 miles long? No.
Because the discharge of that stream
would change all along those 40 mi that
40 mile length. It would be constantly
changing as more streams join it or
groundwater flows into it. So that does
that's not relevant. The 40 mile length
is not relevant. the gradient of the
stream which is important and we've
looked talked about that already um has
no bearing on the discharge either. What
we just need to know is what is the
cross-sectional area of the stream
channel and how much water is it
carrying in terms of or what's the
velocity of that water as it moves
downstream. The other way you might have
tackled this is just look at what units
you need. You need three units of feet
and one unit of seconds. And the only
way to get that is to take 60 square
feet. That gives you two units of feet
and times it by the 10 feet per second.
And so the answer here again was B. 600
cubic feet per second. That is the
discharge of this stream. Area times
velocity. Good stuff. Who who loves who
doesn't love a good quiz with some
numbers and math? I do. I think it's
great. All righty, friends. Uh that is
episode 34. How streams work. And in the
next episode, we'll look at some of the
land forms created by streams and we'll
talk a little bit about floods. Thanks
for your support of the channel. Hope
you enjoyed this episode and take care.