# Ep35 - Stream Landforms.txt
Video ID: HxpIznKw8VU
Lang: en
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HxpIznKw8VU

---

Hi there and welcome to another episode
in the geology 101 physical geology
video series. I'm geology professor Sha
Wily. This video series is just like my
physical geology course I teach here at
the college. Same curriculum, same
content. Uh you're just missing some of
the labs and field trips which you can
somewhat supplement with some of the
other videos I have here on my YouTube
channel. Thanks for joining me today.
Today in episode 35, we're going to look
at different land forms created by
rivers and streams. talk a bit about
floods and kind of piggyback on what we
covered in episode 34. So, if you
haven't watched episode 34, make sure
you watch that one first where we talk
about velocity, gradient, uh more of the
dynamics and characteristics of streams
before you watch this one. I think it'll
make a lot more sense. So, let's go
ahead and get to it here. So, the river
is obviously moving. It is an energetic
entity and with the velocity and the
energy and the volume of water that the
stream carries of course it's able to
transport sediment. That's sort of the
main job I suppose of the river or
stream is to transport sediment and it
does that in a couple of different ways.
It can either carry fine particles in
suspension like basically in the water
column itself. Uh and that's what we
call the suspended load. And then the
larger particles that it can't quite
carry in suspension, it just drags those
across the bed of the stream. Maybe
they're rolling, maybe they're skipping
and bouncing along the bed of the
stream. And that's called bed load. Now
the size of the particles depends a lot
on the volume of water in the stream,
the gradient, the discharge. All those
things are important and will dictate to
some degree the size of the sediment. It
might be just claysized particles in the
suspended load with sand on the bottom
as the bed load. Or it could actually be
sand that's carried as the suspended
load in a more energetic stream and
larger gravel size particles in the bed
load. I'm going to show you here just a
little example of that. I have a fun
little tube here. Um, and this tube has
obviously water in it, but also has sand
and gravel. And so if I give this
velocity and shake it up,
I don't know if you can hear the gravel
moving around in there, I can transport
all the material. But as I start to slow
it down, the gravel and the sand settle
out really quickly. They've already been
deposited as I stopped moving the little
tube here. And now you can see this
murky water up here. This is the
suspended load. And over time that
suspended load, if I let this just sit
on my desk for an hour or two, that
suspended load will settle out and be
deposited as well. So just a simple
example of how that works with the
suspended load and the bed load. So that
is the work of the stream is to
transport the sediment. Um just some
pictures here to show you how this might
look. Here's a river in flood stage, the
Elbow River in Washington. You can see a
big log right here. And you can see just
how murky that water looks. It It looks
like chocolate milks, maybe tomato soup.
Um, but that is a river at high flood
stage carrying a tremendous amount of
material as suspended load. The water is
no longer clear or transparent. Um, it's
quite murky and that would be a good
example of suspended load. Then this
bottom left photo here shows these large
particles, these gravels and cobbles
here on and near the bed of the stream.
This is the bed load. Now, right now
they're not moving because the river is
at a fairly uh low flow there. But you
can imagine when we increase the
velocity, increase the discharge during
a flooding event that we could attain a
enough force from the water itself to
cause these rocks to flip over, to roll,
to bounce, to to collide with each
other. that of course will allow them to
become more rounded. Um they're not
going to get picked up and carried by
the water in the water column per se,
but they're going to get dragged and
moved along the bottom. And that's a
good example of bed load. Now, when we
talk about streams, we can also talk
about their ability to carry sediment as
both a volume and a size. And so these
are two characteristics we often look at
with streams and that is their capacity
and their competence or competency. So
the capacity would just be how much
sediment the stream can carry. So the
volume of sediment that the stream can
carry. And this is going to be
determined by the discharge. Larger
discharge rivers that carry more water
can move and transport a greater load of
sediment to their their base level to
their mouth where they'll then deposit
and dump most of that sediment. The
other way we can look at streams is
their competence. So basically what's
the largest size particle rock if you
will that a stream can transport and
that's going to be a function more of
its velocity. So you can imagine
standing by the banks of a stream uh
that's moving by at a fairly good clip
and let's say you start with a small
little pebble. You throw that in the
stream and you if it's let's say the
water is really clear and you can see to
the bottom and you notice that as soon
as it hits the water the water or soon
as that rock hits the water the water
moves it downstream. But let's go to a
bigger and you you select bigger and
larger size rocks over time. Eventually
you get to a size where it moves but
just barely. And if you go to a larger
particle, it just sits there on the
bottom. It does not get transported by
the river based on the velocity of that
particular moment. And so that would be
capturing the competence of the stream.
What's the biggest rock size that you
can move? And of course floods actually
increase both of these parameters. So
when we have floods, we have more volume
of water. we have greater velocity and
so we can increase the capacity and the
competence or competency the sediment
that the stream carries. We often call
this stuff alvium. It might be large
particles like in the photo here. It
could be finer sized particles. Depends
on the stream's characteristics. Um but
it's a fun word to know I suppose
because you might be looking at property
that you're looking to buy and you
notice that your property on a geologic
map sits on an area of alovvium. So the
next question I would have is well what
where is the stream that deposited that
alovvium? Maybe it was millions of years
ago and the river is not even in that
landscape anymore. Maybe the stream is
nearby and if it deposited that aluvium
there at one point is it possible that
it could deposit that material again.
Maybe you're up on a terrace, maybe
you're down by the water. Um but usually
when we see floods and high discharge
events, the velocity tends to drop. The
sediment gets deposited. Sometimes
that's on the channel or the bed of the
stream. Sometimes it's on the banks of
the stream. Sometimes it's across a
large valley. We'll talk about that in a
second, like a flood plane. Or it could
be at the mouth of the stream where it
ends at a at a valley or an ocean or a
lake. But regardless, if it's sediment
transported by water, moving water, it
is called aluvium. So this is a slide
from the last episode. You might
remember this from episode 34. And in
episode 34, we talked about uh the
movement of water down a channel and
where the velocity is high along the
outside bend of a meander or a bend in
the stream and where the velocity is
low. And that's kind of where we ended
that episode. We didn't go much further
than that. But now we're actually going
to give a name to these landform
features. We're going to look at several
different types of stream landforms that
are often quite common. And so this this
area on the outside of the bend where
the velocity is higher, the stream is
moving faster and it's actually eroding
or cutting into the its banks over here.
This is what's known as a cutbank. So
this is what's known as the cutbank of
the stream. There's even a town in
Montana called Cutbank, Montana. Um, and
over on the other side of the stream
where we have lower velocity on the
inside of this meander or bend, this is
what's called the point bar. So, the
point bar is an area of sediment
deposition. Sediment is being dropped
and deposited here. And so, this is
what's known as a point bar. Again,
erosion on this side, uh, deposition on
this side. If you think about how this
landscape might change over time, well,
if the if the river is cutting into its
banks over here to form this cut bank,
that means that over time this stream
meander, this the actual position of
this bend in the river over time is
going to change and it's going to shift
more into this direction. So we might
see in the future that the meander has
moved or migrated or cut in this
direction and that we might see the edge
of that meander over here at some point
in time. Of course that stand it should
stand to reason that if the cutbank and
the meander moves in this direction then
the point bar will move with it. So the
point bar will actually move in that
direction as well. So the whole river
channel is shifting across the landscape
dynamically over time. So rivers are
incredibly dynamic entities. They they
move on human time scales quite easily.
So we can also see in a in a steeper,
more rugged landscape like the Grand
Canyon, you can start to pick out these
features still as well. You can see the
the main uh current here going down the
left side of the stream. The stream's
flowing away from us in this view. So
you can see where the stream is flowing.
This would have the highest velocity
over here. This is where in in a big
valley it would be cutting into the
landscape. But these are hard resistant
rocks. So it's it's not cutting as
quickly. But what we can see on the
opposite side where the inside of the
bend of the stream is, we can see
another point bar. And the point bar
here has actually gravels and sand on
it. So point bars need not always be one
specific sediment type. In a more
energetic, steeper river, you might see
gravels and larger sediment sizes that
make up that point bar.
Other landforms we find in these types
of settings would be things like flood
planes. So, here is a stream meandering
across this region. Um, you can see it's
a little bit hilly down here, a little
bit hilly over here going up to some
higher topography. But this area which
gets flooded whenever the river floods
it spills out over its banks. It
inundates this area and each time it
does it it deposits some of that
suspended load. Those fine uh sediment
sizes get deposited on the landscape and
it creates this flat region adjacent to
the stream that we call a flood plane.
Uh now somewhere in the course of human
civilization we forgot this one basic
fact. Flood planes flood. Uh and it's
no, you know, it's it it makes sense why
humans would have settled these areas.
It's close to rivers which were a source
of water and transportation, uh good
soils for growing crops. Uh but
nonetheless, flood planes do flood over
time and so that's why they they merit a
certain amount of caution as a hazard.
So these are flood planes. Other stream
landforms that are pretty common are
things like deltas. So here you can see
this stream flowing down into this body
of water, this lake here. Um, and you
can see that the river has deposited
over time this somewhat triangular
shaped uh deposit here. And this is
what's known as the delta. And so you
can see the river is actively flowing in
this region here. You can actually see
the channel here. Some of the suspended
load different color as it hits this uh
very beautiful water here. You can see
where the stream has flowed in the past.
But as the stream flows down, uh, it
actually is depositing material along
its bed, along the bottom of the stream,
and that builds up the bottom of the
stream to the point where at some point
the river moves from that channel into
some other channel. Now, it looks like
it's been moving in this area recently.
U, but it also could move into this
region. It it moved there once in the
past. That's why there's land there. And
the river could eventually what we call
a grade build up sediment in this area
and migrate into some lower uh area over
here and start flowing in this
direction. So you know if I was looking
to build a house somewhere in this
landscape I would definitely would not
build on the delta. Even if you um you
know even taking out the worry of a
flood and a high discharge event just
the river flowing you know at a constant
discharge it's depositing sediment in
this channel. It's going to eventually
abandon this channel and select some new
pathway for it to flow. This buildup of
sediment here is what's known as a
delta. We get similar features in drier,
more aid regions like deserts where a
stream comes down uh out of some higher
relief area like the mountains here.
This is down in Death Valley. And then
it enters this big flat landscape. This
is one of the big uh dry lake beds, the
pliers there in Death Valley. And as it
depos and as it comes down to this flat
landscape, it immediately loses a lot of
its velocity, the gradient goes to zero.
And so it deposits this big fan shaped
uh bit of material here. This is all
sand, gravel, and maybe a little bit of
clay on the landscape. You see actually
see the road here coming around the edge
of this um this aluvial fan. And then
let's go down to road level so we can
see the different slopes because we have
three different topographic features
here. We have the steep mountains there.
We have this less steep aluvial fan. And
then we have the valley floor here which
I suppose is best seen down here in the
bottom left or the left edge of the
photo where you can see some of the salt
uh and mud deposits there. And this
would of course be fairly flat. So if we
go down to street level um we can see
the road here. We can see the steep
mountain front. We can see the flat
valley floor of the playa here in
Badwater Basin. And then we can see the
aluvial fan itself. So hopefully you can
see those three almost three different
uh slopes if you will. The the slope of
the mountain front, the slope of the
aluvial fan and then the flat nearly
horizontal slope there of the basin
itself.
So when we look at streams, we have
different uh landscapes that streams
form. Of course, valleys and canyons are
one of those types of uh topographic
features. So, some streams that are very
young uh or they're starting out in a in
a landscape where they're, you know,
down cutting the area maybe is being
uplifted. So, for example, the
Yellowstone River here, this is the
Grand Canyon of the Yellowstone, a very
young landscape. And you can see we have
a fairly straight stream. There's a few
little bends in the river, but it's in a
very tight V-shaped valley. There's no
flood plane whatsoever. There's no large
meanders to the stream. It's quite
narrow. Um, it has sometimes have
waterfalls on it. It might have rapids
and and white water. Uh, this indicates
this is a very young, youthful uh stream
system. But over time, as the the water
starts to meander back and forth across,
you know, cutting into the walls of the
canyon, it's going to take this very
rugged landscape and make it a little
more subdued. The canyon is going to get
wider over time. that will allow the
stream more area to meander back and
forth. Waterfalls and other steep
features will become uh less so and this
landscape will become more open and more
wide. It takes you know quite a bit of
time obviously over geological periods
but eventually we might have more of
like a wide valley. And so this this
boring slide with some words here hang
with me here and I'll get you to a nice
graphic here in a second. So, uh, we've
talked about the flood plane, the
meandering stream back and forth, uh,
carving out and creating this big wide
flat area adjacent to the stream. We've
talked about the cut banks and the point
bars depending on where the current is
fastest and where it's slowest. Over
time, those meanders can actually get
cut off and the stream can create a
shortcut. I'll show you an image of that
here in a second that'll make sense. And
those abandoned meanders, if they're
filled with water, those are sometimes
what we call oxbow lakes. They kind of
look like the the harness that uh
pioneers used to put on their oxen as
they were, you know, pulling their carts
and such. And if they're left dry and
not filled with water, they're sometimes
called meander scars. And so here is a
Google Earth image of the Nitta River in
Alaska. So you can see this stream
meandering across this landscape. The
point bars show up very nicely, these
lighter colored uh deposits of sediment
on the inside bend of the meanders,
excuse me. And we can see places where
remember the river flows fastest around
the outside of the bend. Here's one in
particular that looks like it's sort of
evolving. So if the river is flowing
faster around this outside bend and
maybe it's not even, you know, moving so
fast here. Um but eventually this this
will little neck of land will get
thinner and thinner and thinner and
eventually the river will breach that
spot take a new path completely
abandoned this channel over here and
create a new path for itself. And when
it abandons that old meander that's what
we call an oxbow lake if those are still
filled with water. And I pointed out one
here but there's a bit of one over here.
There's a great one down here. a little
bit of one here at the bottom edge of
the the photo. You can just see several
of these. You can also see places where
they're no longer filled with water, but
you can actually see where the river
used to flow across the landscape. So,
these are these meander scars. This this
one here is almost a little bit of both.
It's got water on the left side here,
and it looks like it's a little drier
here on the right side. So, a bit of a a
meander scar there. So, incredibly
dynamic these these streams and
incredibly impressive landforms. I
invite you to just get on Google Earth
and just, you know, find a river stream.
Uh, just zoom in, check out the
different features, and you can learn a
lot by by doing that. You can learn a
lot about river dynamics and how things
look over time. Uh, I want to end this
episode by talking just briefly about
floods. We could spend a whole another
episode on floods, flash floods, um,
different aspects of flood systems. Um,
but let's just just end with floods just
briefly. So this is the most common and
destructive of all the hazards more than
you know earthquakes and volcanoes. Um
at least you know year in and year out.
Floods happen more often than anything
else. They happen I think in virtually
every country, every continent. Uh
they're incredibly common across
multiple landscapes. And the reason we
get floods is pretty complicated, but it
usually boils down to several factors.
So it might be heavy precipitation.
That's probably the most common one. You
just put too much water uh onto the
landscape very quickly. It could be
maybe the remnants of a hurricane or a
tropical storm. It could just be a heavy
rainstorm event, a prolonged rainstorm
that just kind of sits over an area for
some period of time. Um how saturated
the ground is will dictate how big the
flood is. So, if the ground is quite
dry, you might be able to absorb a lot
of that initial rainfall or snow and not
really get as bad of a flood or maybe no
flood depending on the situation. But
once the ground is saturated, the water
can't absorb or hold any more water. So,
it starts flowing along the surface and
that really sets the stage for these
flooding events. The topography is very
important. Um, how quickly water is
moving from high elevation to low
elevation. Is it steep topography? Is it
more subdued? How big are the drainage
areas that the the individual river and
stream systems uh have? Do they drain
large areas or small areas? That will
dictate how much water can be in that
particular system. And then sometimes we
get actually things like dam failures.
We could get uh you know natural dams. I
don't mean like beaver dams, but things
like uh landslide dams that you know
landslides go down into a river, dam up
the river and you can get those types of
failures. might be um like in the
western Grand Canyon, there's actually
lava dams where volcanic eruptions have
taken place. Lava has poured into the
canyon, damned up the canyon, and then
later you can get those breaching. Or it
could be man-made dam failures. Here in
Idaho in the late '7s, there was a um
historic uh catastrophic collapse of the
Teton Dam um that was very much a high
impact event to the areas downstream. So
just a few examples there of different
types of flood events there. So that is
our episode here wrapping up the section
on rivers and streams and thanks for
joining me and we'll see you in another
episode. Take care.