# Ep36 - Groundwater Concepts.txt
Video ID: Uo0ols9fEls
Lang: en
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Uo0ols9fEls

---

Hey there, folks, and welcome to another
video in the Geology 101 physical
geology video series. I'm geology
professor Shawn Willsey. Thanks for
joining me today. Today, we are going to
look at groundwater. This is episode 36
in the Geology 101 series, and this
video series is largely modeled after my
college class. It's the same topics, the
same curriculum. It's basically the
exact same thing. Uh we are missing, of
course, like lab components, field
trips, but you can supplement some of
those experiences by watching some of my
other videos here in the catalog. So,
let's go ahead and get right to it with
this episode number 36 and look at
groundwater. Groundwater's kind of an
interesting topic because it's something
that I think we all recognize as
important, um something that's critical
for civilization, but it's an often, I
think, misunderstood
uh concept because it's something we
can't see for the most part until it
makes its way to the surface, like we
see there with the spring. Uh we don't
really see how groundwater moves through
the subsurface. So, it's a bit of an
enigma. It's a bit of a mystery, and I
think there's some misconceptions about,
you know, how exactly groundwater moves
through the earth and exactly sort of
the conduits and the pathways that it
takes. So, we're going to explore that
in some detail someday. So, starting out
with groundwater, um it does represent
about 30% of all of Earth's fresh water.
So, we have this very watery planet.
Most of that water, of course, is in the
oceans, um but it is a large chunk, only
second to glacial ice in terms of the
amount of fresh water on planet Earth,
and it's probably one of the most
important uh reservoirs of fresh water
when it comes to human consumption. Now,
another misconception about groundwater
is sometimes people think you have to,
you know, to find it. If you're going to
drill for a well, you have to go to a
certain place, and it might be here, it
might be there, but it's not necessarily
everywhere. but essentially it really
kind of is everywhere. Groundwater, you
could pick any place on the map, drill
down, and you'll get some amount of
groundwater. It's just a matter of how
much water is present in that location,
and what the quality of that water is,
along with how deep that water is. So,
those are the three variables there.
But, it's it's pretty omnipresent
underneath most of the earth's surface.
It's just again a matter of depth and
quality and how much water is available
to be used. So, let's look at some basic
concepts of groundwater. Uh the first
one here is the water table. Basically,
as water seeps into the ground and
percolates down through soil or sediment
or rocks, eventually it reaches a point
where it's saturated, meaning that all
the available pore spaces, all the space
that the water could be, uh is there.
And so, it's filled in all that all that
uh space at that level. And so, the top
of that surface is what we call the
water table. A good example of that here
with this photo here in the top right,
uh we see there is a a hole that
someone's dug at the beach. And if
you've ever done this before at the
beach, you know that you can only dig
down so far before the water just kind
of seeps back in through the ground. And
so, that water line there that we're
seeing in that hole that's been dug is
essentially the water table. That's the
groundwater seeping in uh at that
elevation to fill that hole. Similar
diagram here on the bottom shows a
stream and kind of a mountainous
topography here, and you can see that
the water table lies uh beneath the
ground at some depth. Now, the water
table is going to vary. Some places it
might be basically at the surface, uh
like in a wetland or very kind of a
marshy environment. Other places it can
be um very deep. It can be, you know,
hundreds of feet, hundreds of meters, uh
thousands of feet. It can be down there
quite a ways. And the water table can
change, depending on seasonal
fluctuations in
rainfall and what we call recharge as as
more water is added to the groundwater
system, that can bring the water table
up. Other times it might drop a little
bit, depending on what's going on at the
surface. But we can figure out where the
water table is if we know where the
springs are. Or in the absence of
springs, we can usually fill out figure
out where the water table is by drilling
wells, which is one of the primary ways
that humans access and acquire
groundwater.
So, um we used to think that groundwater
and surface water weren't not really um
connected, or at least we treated them
that way from a management point of
view, but they are very much connected.
So, groundwater and surface water have a
very uh intimate relationship, and we
often times see either what we call
gaining streams or losing streams. So,
here in this diagram, we have a stream
flowing in this direction, and because
the water table sits higher than the
elevation of the stream, that means that
the groundwater is flowing through the
subsurface, and it is going into the
stream. It's actually adding water to
the stream, and so then that therefore
it is a gaining stream. The The stream
is gaining water uh through groundwater.
Groundwater is providing input into the
stream. And then of course it would
stand to reason that we would have the
opposite end of the spectrum, which is
what we call losing stream. So, here we
have the water table at a much lower
level than the stream. So, the stream is
actually losing water. Water is flowing
down under the influence of gravity, and
it's leaving the stream bed and going
into the groundwater system. And
depending on, you know, some of the the
variables and such, you might even have
one specific stream might be gaining
along some stretches of that stream, and
and other stretches it might be losing
uh water to the groundwater system. So,
gaining streams and losing streams is an
important concept when we look at
groundwater and surface water
interactions. This is a funnel animation
that kind of shows how it might work.
So, here we have a lot of rainfall here,
so the water table is high. You can see
the two wells there, but as the rainfall
diminishes, we might lower the water
table enough that we dry up a well, but
we also get a losing stream. So, we go
back to the beginning, notice again the
water table is higher than the stream,
and so it this would be a gaining
stream, but as the water table drops, it
can drop to the point where it's
actually lower than the elevation of the
stream, and that stream then also then
becomes a losing stream. So, this can be
a seasonal um
change as well. So, depending on just
how much rainfall you're getting and
some other variables there. So, that
tells you a little bit of how this
groundwater surface water interaction
goes. Well, let's do a quiz. Everyone
loves the quizzes.
Um so, what I have here for you is a map
of a stream system, so you can see the
stream and its tributary shown here in
white. Let's just say the stream's
flowing this way to the southwest. And
then what we have on the stream is
various points shown with the blue dots,
and at these blue dots we are reporting
how much discharge the stream carries.
So, what is the volume of water per unit
time, cubic feet per second in this
case, but it could also be cubic meters
per second, doesn't matter. So, how much
stream the water is carrying? Again, if
you haven't watched the previous
two episodes on streams, that might be a
good chance to go back and look at that
for you tackle the quiz. But again, you
can see at various points on the stream
what the stream's discharge
level is, or how much water is flowing
downstream. And then our question is,
given these discharge points, what is
the total groundwater contribution to
this gaining stream between points Y and
X? You can see these two points here.
So, what we're trying to figure out is
how much water, what is the amount of
water that is being added to the stream
system via groundwater. So, if you need
to, go ahead and pause the video while
you work this out.
All right, let's go ahead and do the big
reveal here. So,
as we look at the system, what we're
really interested in is the stretch
between X and Y. Notice that there's no
tributaries joining the stream. So, in
order to figure out how much groundwater
is being contributed, we need to know
what the discharge is at X. Well, that's
given to us, 1,200 cubic feet per
second. We also need to know the
discharge of Y, which is not given to
us, but we can make a pretty good
inference here by looking at Y's
position just at downstream of this
confluence between these two
tributaries, looking at how much water
this branch of the stream is carrying,
about 300 cubic feet per second. This
branch of the stream over here is
carrying about 700 cubic feet per
second. So, it stands to reason as those
two streams merge here just below above
point Y, they would be carrying a
combined flow of about 1,000 cubic feet
per second. These two numbers up here,
these discharge points, don't really
matter cuz they're further up in the
stream system, and all's we're really
concerned with is how much groundwater
or how much water is being carried
between X and Y. So, if we have 1,000
cubic feet per second at Y, 1,200 cubic
feet per second at X, that tells us that
there's an extra 200 cubic feet per
second that's being added to this stream
through groundwater. There's no other
contribution that can be added to this
stream
except through groundwater. There's no
tributaries coming into it, no ways to
add water, so the reasonable conclusion
there would be groundwater is adding to
the stream system. So, the correct
answer there was A. Hope you did well on
that one.
Um okay, so let's look at a couple other
porosities related to uh groundwater
movement and behavior. First one is
porosity, basically how much of any
given material, could be sand, could be
rock, anything, um how much of that
volume is actually open space. So, you
know, if you pour a bowl of Cocoa Puffs
cereal um right to the brim, right? Like
you like you can't add any more Cocoa
Puffs to your bowl, well, you can add
milk, right? Or water. You can add a a
liquid there because that's going in
between the pore spaces there. And with
rocks and sediment, it's the same thing.
So, we have a couple of things that will
influence the amount of porosity in a
geologic material. One is just if we're
looking at sediment, the size and the
shape of the sediment. Now, clay, which
is the finest size particles when we
look at sediment, actually has about 50%
porosity. It has actually quite a bit of
its volume is actually open space, pore
space. When we look at sand or gravel,
it's around 35 to 40%. So, it's, you
know, when we're looking at sediment,
there's there's appreciable amounts of
that material that are just open space.
So, they both have fairly high
porosities.
Um
And another way to look at that would be
to look at the shape of the sediment,
not shown here in this diagram. Notice
if you have rounded sediment, you have a
certain amount of pore space. If you
have more angular sediment, uh you also
have pore space, but it might be a
little bit different. It depends on um
you know, how well these are kind of
connected as to how porous they are. So,
it varies quite a bit, but these do
influence the amount of porosity in the
sediment. Another important parameter is
how compacted and cemented the material
is. If that sediment is actually
somewhat cemented, if there's cement
minerals and material in between the
grains, then that's going to reduce the
amount of porosity. So, as we as we
increase the cementation between these
grains, we're decreasing the porosity.
Same thing with compaction. If the
grains are squished closer together,
that's going to reduce the porosity. So,
these both play factors in determining
the porosity of the material. And the
last thing here is sorting. That's a
term we used back in the sedimentary
rock episode. Sorting refers to the um
distribution of grain sizes. So, notice
here we have large and small particles.
And if you have large and small
particles, what we call poorly sediment
poorly sorted sediment, um that's going
to reduce the porosity because those
small grains can fit into these large
pore spaces between these large grains
and take up some of that space. And so,
we would see the porosity be much more
reduced versus something like this one
here where all the grains are basically
close to the same size. And you can see
the pore spaces there are quite large.
And so, the porosity would therefore be
quite a bit higher. So, that's the
concept of porosity. Just how much space
um is available for water to go into a
given geologic material.
Um rocks are a little different than
than sediment. Uh and we see a lot of
diversity when we look at rocks. This is
just a simple diagram showing you a few
of the basic rock types and main and how
much porosity we might see in any one of
these given rock types. Notice something
like granite only has maybe 1% porosity.
Granite has crystals all squished
together. There is no pore space. But
the one thing we often see in granite
and essentially all rocks are fractures.
So, depending on how
um
you know, how how intricate those
fractures are, how
um dense the the spacing is of those
fractures. If there's lots of
interconnected fractures, that's going
to increase the porosity. Uh if there's
less fracturing in the granite, that's
going to reduce the porosity. And so, we
would ideally need these materials to
have fairly high porosity in order to
hold and store and ultimately transmit
groundwater. So, granite typically is
not a great uh reservoir for groundwater
unless it has, you know, adequate
fracturing to it. Other rock types you
can see here, conglomerate, you know,
20% uh if it's a cemented well-cemented
sandstone, you might be down to like 5%,
but again, these vary quite a bit, so
really it's more of a range. Limestone
and then basalt, the fractures and the
vesicles or the gas bubbles in the
basalt uh can often lead to it having
fairly high porosity. So, porosity is
one important parameter we look at. The
other one is something called
permeability. This is how well does the
geologic material
transmit water? How well can the water
move through that unit? Um and so, if
the pores are big enough and they're
connected, that will allow the water to
move through more efficiently. And we
see there's a relationship between with
sediment, with the size of the sediment
and the amount of permeability. So, as
the sediment is larger, kind of a
gravel-sized particles, the pore spaces
are larger, they're interconnected very
well, and so we have very high
permeability. The water can move through
that material pretty easy. If we go to
the other end of the spectrum, the
finest-sized sediments like clay,
um they have porosity, there's plenty of
space there, but the spaces aren't very
well connected, the water really just
can't get through those pore spaces cuz
they're so small, and so this has fairly
low permeability. Sometimes we even say
that it's impermeable, uh which means
for all intents and purposes, the water
just can't get through.
Um and I've got a simple
a a video I did here that'll help
illustrate this a bit. So, I did a video
uh down at Thousand Springs, and I'll
make sure I put a link to this in the
video description, where I take a beaker
of gravel, a beaker of sand, and to show
the difference between the gravel and
the sand in terms of permeability,
um I actually pour water into them. And
you can see the speed at which the water
moves through these two substances. So,
here we go. Here's the water moving
through the gravel, and you can see it
gets through almost instantly. Like with
in a second or two, it's just very
permeable. The water can move down
through the gravel cuz those pore spaces
are quite large and very well
interconnected. So, there's the gravel
there, and then next I'm going to do the
same thing with the sand, and you can
see it's slower. It takes a lot longer
for the water to work its way down
through this beaker of sand. Um again,
due to gravity, under the influence of
gravity, it works its way down, but it
takes a lot longer. It's It's much
longer than it was with the gravel. So,
it has less permeability than the
gravel. And so, that's kind of the idea
there. Um okay. So, going back to our
presentation.
Okay, porosity permeability, two very
critical concepts. We Now that we've
kind of talked a little bit about
porosity and permeability and some of
these other aspects of ground water,
let's introduce some terms that are very
often used, and you probably already
know these a little bit anyway, but
let's just make sure we're on the same
page. So, an aquifer is any geologic
unit that can will trans store and
transmit ground water. So, it needs to
be both porous and permeable to some
degree. It doesn't need to be,
you know, the most pro porous or have
the highest permeability, but it needs
to have space that the water can go, and
it needs to be able to transmit that
water. Might be slow or slower like the
sand was.
Uh sand is still a very fine aquifer.
Doesn't need to be as quick as the
gravel, but it needs to be both of those
things. So, that is an aquifer.
Uh an aquitard is or sometimes we call
it an aquiclude is any geologic unit
that doesn't allow groundwater to go
through it very easily. Might be that
clay we talked about or granite without
the fractures. Anything that impedes
groundwater movement is what we would
call an aquitard. A spring is anywhere
where the water table intersects the
ground. So, where water table intersects
the ground and the water the groundwater
then comes to the surface and becomes
surface water. That's what we call a
spring. And then two more terms for you,
uh recharge and discharge.
This would be Recharge would be anytime
we have water entering the aquifer. So,
basically snowmelt up in the mountains,
could be a rainfall event, but usually
it's at a higher elevation. And then
that water then seeps into the ground,
flows downhill through the ground, and
then at some point it exits the aquifer
maybe at a spring.
And that was what we would call
discharge. If we have a well drilled
into the groundwater system, that would
is a what we would call an artificial
discharge point. It's not natural. We've
created it, but water is leaving the
aquifer, exiting the system, and that's
discharge. So, we think about these two
terms, recharge, discharge, almost like
your your checking account. Recharge is
water put into the account, you're
adding water. Discharge is water leaving
or exiting the system.
Um
Okay, so let's turn now to another
simple animation while we're on the
concept of wells to some degree. And
this is an old
Pearson Education
animation. Best one I could find. It's a
little grainy here, but it's going to
convey this concept just fine. So, what
we have here is we have a cross-section
showing the water table here. We can see
there's two wells. There's a well that
is a bit more shallow and then a much
deeper well. And in this fun depiction
here, we have a small water user. So,
this might be, you know, just a single
family residence with their well that's
been there for some years that goes down
and it taps the ground water. Then we
have maybe a larger water user. Maybe
again it's a bigger farm or someone that
just needs a greater amount of water for
whatever reason and they have a much
deeper well. Well, whenever a well is
drilled, as long as the water table is
below the surface, which it often is,
that necessitates that we need to pump
the water to the surface. We have to
actually put in an electrical pump which
will actually pump the water overcoming
gravity and get that water to the
surface for we can use it. So, I'm going
to show this a little bit further. So,
as the wells get pumped to the surface,
what we'll see here is there is an
effect on the water system of drawing
the water down. It's actually called
drawdown. And what it creates is a
three-dimensional pit around that pumped
well that we call a cone of depression.
Notice the cone of depression around the
small well, which isn't pumping as much
water, is much smaller. And with the
larger well, that cone of depression is
greater. Now, the cone of depression and
how much drawdown occurs, those will
depend somewhat on how much water you're
pumping, these aquifer characteristics
we've talked about like porosity and
permeability, lots of other factors. But
let's let this go a little further. In
this the animation here, we're going to
see that the
large water user with the deep well is
going to be pumping an excessive amount
of water to the point where the water
table gets lowered so much and creates
such a large cone of depression that it
actually leaves the smaller, shallower
well high and dry. And this is something
that actually happens quite often
in many different communities. This is
why we have water rights disputes and
water rights litigation. And so now we
have this smaller water user whose well
has gone dry due to the pumping from the
larger water user. And this is where it
would become possibly a big legal tussle
and you'd have to look at the who has
the senior water rights if you're in the
US. Don't know how that works in other
countries. But water rights disputes and
litigation is a big branch of the legal
system, at least here in the US.
Anyway, so you can see the idea here is
that we're just learning about cones of
depression and how that can affect the
water table.
Okay, so
going back to
finish out this episode.
Um
Okay, so we've talked about recharge and
discharge. Let's finish out this episode
by looking at a few different types of
aquifers. So most aquifers are in what
we would call an unconfined aquifer.
Like if you put a well over here, you
drill down
and tap this water that's down here. So
the ground water shown in blue, the
unsaturated portion of the the
subsurface is shown in brown. So if we
drilled around here, then well down into
this area over here, we might have a
unconfined aquifer, okay? Other places
we sometimes have what's called a
perched aquifer. Maybe there's a layer
of clay or some impermeable unit
and the water collects and accumulates
above that impermeable layer or
aquitard. And so you can get a smaller,
a sort of secondary groundwater system.
In this case, it's what we call a
perched aquifer. And you might have a
well drilled down into it. You might be
able to supply you know, several farms,
a small town,
probably depends how big and and and how
big that perched water perched aquifer
is, how extensive it is,
but you might get a smaller amount of
water there. But in either case, we need
a well to pump that water to the
surface. Well, there is a situation
where you can have the water
groundwater come to you without needing
a pump. And that's what's called a
confined aquifer. So, a confined aquifer
is can happen for a lot of reasons. I'm
going to stick to one fairly simple
geologic model that shows how you might
get a confined aquifer. Typically, you
need to have though some impermeable
layer, some aquitard both above and
below the aquifer. So, in this case
here, we have a series of in this
cross-section, series of sedimentary
rock layers, limestone, sandstone,
shale,
but here in this one in particular, we
have a bed of sandstone that is confined
by these layers of shale on either side
of it. And in this case, the sandstone
bed is curved or tilted so that it
outcrops at the surface. So, when it
rains or if the snow melts, water can
enter the aquifer here. So, this would
be our recharge area. Now, the water is
traveling through the sandstone downward
under the influence of gravity, but it
can't go up cuz it runs into that
impermeable layer, and it can't go down
deeper because of that same impermeable
layer. And so, it's a confined unit.
It's a confined bed of sandstone and a
confined groundwater system. So, if you
come now and drill wells down into this
confined aquifer, the water will rise to
some what we call pressure surface.
Basically, think of it as the water
table. It depends on how much water is
in the system and the pressure and
stuff, but basically, the water wants to
rise to this level. So, notice with well
A and C, the water has risen almost to
the surface, but not quite. So, you
would still need a pump to get the water
that last little bit up to the surface.
But, if the top of your well, like B and
D, sit lower than that water table or
pressure surface, then you would get
what's called a flowing artesian well.
The water would actually, because it's
under pressure,
rise up through the well and flow out to
the surface. And that would be, you
know, an ideal situation cuz then you
don't need a pump. Pumps tend to, you
know, break down and have, you know,
motor problems or they need to be
replaced periodically. And so, they can
be a bit of a pain that way. But, this
would is what an example of a confined
aquifer and a flowing artesian well. All
the wells are essentially artesian.
They're tapping this confined aquifer,
but only B and D are the flowing
artesian wells. So, hopefully that makes
sense. So, in our next episode, we'll go
a little bit further with groundwater
and we'll look at things like
groundwater erosion, we'll look at
caves, sinkholes, we'll look at some of
the effects of over pumping groundwater,
and maybe we'll even look at some
hydrothermal features, things you see
like hot springs, geysers, things like
that that related to groundwater. But,
thanks for your support of the channel.
Hope you're enjoying these geology 101
videos
free of charge, and we'll see you next
time. Take care.