# Ep37 - Groundwater Issues and Caves.txt
Video ID: YBTSB5KcFAE
Lang: en
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YBTSB5KcFAE

---

Hey there team and welcome to episode 37
in the physical geology geology 101
video series. I am geology professor
Sean Wily. Thanks for joining me. Um
this video series physical geology is
modeled right after my college course.
It's the same content curriculum
information knowledge that you'd get
just as if you were sitting right there
in my classroom. Um, it's designed for
those who have either taken a geology
course in the past, either, you know,
distant or maybe not so distant, those
who've never had geology, people who
want to review uh, anything under the
sun. This is just a basic course in
physical geology to help you understand
and learn more about this planet of
ours. If you're enjoying this video
series and some of my other videos, uh,
look under the video description and
there's some ways there if you want to
support the channel and my educational
outreach efforts. There's some options
there for you. So, let's go ahead and
jump right into this episode. Today,
we're going to talk about groundwater
issues and we're also going to talk
about caves as well, which is an
interesting and fascinating um, feature
that's created through uh, with
groundwater as the primary mechanism. So
remember last time we looked a lot of
basics related to groundwater. We talked
a little bit about recharge and
discharge. Discharge being when water is
leaving the system. Recharge being when
water is entering the groundwater
system. And you can really start
thinking about not just groundwater but
the entire water system as a bit of a
like a budget, right? Just like your
checking account. You've got your
withdrawals, you have your deposits, and
then of course you have, you know,
whatever your balance is in that
account. And so we often look at the
groundwater system in the same way.
Thinking about a budget, you know, all
the water coming into the system could
be precipitation, could be snow melt,
could be artificial recharge if we're
actually manipulating the system and
adding water to our groundwater system.
And then all the water leaving the
system, that could be natural points
like springs, could also be artificial
points like wells and other things that
that remove water from the system. And
so uh there's a simple equation here
just like again back to your checking
account that we use to evaluate the
groundwater budget. Basically the the
water coming in if you take all that
water uh as a volume I suppose and look
at all the water coming in and subtract
the amount of water leaving the system
that gives us our change in storage. And
so we can again look at this like just
like a checking account or a bank
account. And this is the way groundwater
managers manage the system is thinking
about uh sources of inflow outflow. And
this is always changing. So some of
these parameters are changing. Some of
them have longer transient times, some
of them have shorter transient times.
But it is a management tool that's often
used for groundwater. Um we can consider
groundwater to be a resource that can
actually be mined. So just like we mine
oil and gas, we mine coal, gold, other
resources from the ground, uh
groundwater can actually be mined in the
sense that if you're taking it out
quicker than it can be replenished,
you're essentially mining that resource.
And of course, that's, you know, not
sustainable over long term. So again,
I'm not trying to make any deep
statements here one way or another, but
these are just some of the implications
of overusing groundwater. We're going to
look at a few issues that arise and are
quite common in today's world when it
comes to overusing groundwater. So the
first one here is subsidance. Basically
when we take water out of the ground,
especially if that water is stored in a
sedimentary aquifer, basically a a
geologic unit that is composed of grains
of sand or gravel, basically sedimentary
particles. that water as you can see in
the graphic here occupies space between
the grains and actually um you know
takes some of the volume out of the
ground and when we actually deplete the
water. So when that water is sucked out
of the ground, those grains get
compacted, they settle the space and the
pacity decreases and that actually
causes the ground to sink. Again, a a a
feature or process we call subsidance.
And so subsidance or subsidance is very
not just common in at least parts of the
western United States. Uh it's actually
kind of a big problem. It comes with it
a whole host of related problems as
well. So this is fundamentally one of
the problems with overusing especially
in shallow groundwater systems in
sedimentary basins in overusing the
water and it can cause the ground to
actually sink a little bit. And so these
are some graphics here that just really
nicely illustrate this. Uh let's start
with the one on the left here. You can
see a poll here. This was taken, you
know, way back in 1977. We have a
gentleman standing here on the ground
and if you can't read the side and it
says Sanwaqin Valley, California. So
this is the central valley of California
and it says subsidance 1925 to 1977. So
if you look way up at the top of the
pole maybe 30 feet up the pole what we
see there is the elevation of the ground
as it was in 1925. By 1955 30 years
later the ground in this valley the land
surface had subsided or sank to the
elevation shown here. And then by 1977
where the gentleman standing there you
can see how much the ground had
subsided. And this is all due to again
in this incredibly productive
agriculture region overping of the
groundwater system causing the sediments
in in the ground to settle compact
reducing their paracity and causing the
land surface to sink as well. So a big
problem there. And then we even have
some more modern uh images I've thrown
in here just so we don't think that this
is something that happened way back in
the day. So here's the same valley, the
the Sanwaqin Valley of California. And
here's another graphic with uh elevation
from 1988 to 2016. And you can see on
the sign about 6.2 feet, about 2 m of
elevation drop of the entire valley over
that period of time uh due to uh
groundwater withdrawal and subsidance.
And then here, just to show you a
different area, lest we think this is
just a California issue. This is an area
in Arizona and you can see 1952 up there
on the pole there down to 1977 down to
1985. So again about 15.4t
or about 5 m or so of subsidance or
subsidance that's taken place there due
to groundwater withdrawal. The other
thing we sometimes see are these
fissurers or cracks that can open up in
the ground as the land sinks or
subsides. Picture there from the
southern Utah and the Utah Geological
Survey. So subsidance is a big problem
with overping groundwater. Another thing
that can arise especially in coastal
areas is something known as saltwater
intrusion. So the idea here is that um
in a coastal setting we have the ocean,
we have the land, we have ocean water or
seawater that seeps down into the
sediments below the ocean forming a
salty uh groundwater body. And then on
the land of course we have a freshwater
or a a freshwater aquifer system here.
And there's a natural boundary that
exists between those two because their
densities are quite a bit different. And
when we have a pump placed on land, so
if we put in a well and pump that water,
if if we're not careful, we can quickly
uh draw in that salt water into this
freshwater well and create some problems
that way. And I'm not sure the details
in terms of like you know how easy this
is to remediate or or fix but it is of
concern and it is a serious problem in
coastal areas. This idea of saltwater
intrusion. Um other places what we see
is uh groundwater reversal or the
contamination can be a problem. So in
this case here we have a home with a
septic tank and we have the well for the
home. This is the clean drinking water
well here. Um but if we have a well in
this case with the bottom diagram if a
well is placed that pumps too hard and
heavily as it creates that cone of
depression as it draws down the water
table can actually reverse the flow of
the water. Notice here in the top
diagram the groundwater the regional
groundwater flow direction is to the
left. So the effluent from the septic
tank is carried away from the well. But
in the bottom diagram with this large uh
well with a heavy pumping rate actually
reverses the flow of the septic tank and
that effluent now is carried towards uh
the resident's drinking water well which
can create some problems as well. Now
you've got a contamination issue. Again,
these things these are mostly solvable
problems, but they may not be easily
solved and they may not be um solved
without substantial amounts of funding
and and and dollars to help with the the
whole problem. Um okay, so let's look
now at caves. Let's look at one of the
main features that forms from some of
these groundwater processes. So when it
rains, when we get rain water falling
out of the atmosphere, that's water,
right? H2O. But as it passes through the
atmosphere, that water actually picks up
a little bit of CO2, a little bit of the
carbon dioxide that's in the atmosphere.
And what we get then chemically and what
falls on the ground and hits your
umbrella and actually hits the surface
of the earth is actually a weak acid, a
carbonic acid. Now, this is not the same
as like acid rain, which is a as a much
lower pH and much much more acidic type
solution, but the point is is that the
water that hits the surface is slightly
acidic. And we know that with things
that are even just a little bit acidic,
that we have certain minerals like
calsite, which is a dominant mineral in
rocks like limestone. And these slightly
acidic solutions then that can dissolve
the calite in the limestone. And over
time, basically what we're doing is
dissolving out the rock, the calite in
the rock, and we can create uh caverns
or caves. And so basically this process
playing out uh over you know long
periods of time you can actually uh
build or establish these cave systems in
the subsurface below the ground and
below the water table and that can
create cave systems which are places we
you know uh go explore part of the
national park system. But if you have a
large cave that's dissolved out some
limestone or calowsite beneath a
property or in a more urban environment,
that can create sink holes which can be
a big hazard and um both financially and
potentially to human lives as well. So
groundwater erosion sort of giveth and
it taketh away. Uh it gives us
spectacular caves and amazing scenery in
an underground environment, but it also
can create these these hazards at the
surface. If the cave roof is too thin,
especially if the water table is
dropping uh due to overping, that can
leave this hollow space beneath the the
property or beneath the home and that
can cause these sink holes to form. Uh
let's look at how caves actually form.
It's actually an interesting process.
And so here we have an area underllayed
by limestone. Again, a rock that is made
out of caly. And calsy, of course, can
be dissolved by water, uh, rainwater,
and water percolating down through the
subsurface. And so, we have the water
starting to work its way down through
the limestone, and it's starting to
dissolve it. So, this always takes place
below the water table. So everything
below the water table is an area where
we're actively creating more space in
the rock because we're dissolving away
rock uh due to this slightly acidic uh
solution the groundwater moving through
the cave system. Notice over here we
have a river um and the surface water
which is a a surface reflection of the
water table. If we go to the next stage
in the diagram here, stage two, we've
substantially created larger cave
systems below the water table. So, the
cave network is expanding uh both along
bedding planes, so horizontally in this
case here, but also along maybe some
vertical fractures that were already
pre-existing that the the groundwater
can exploit. Um, so that's our second
one here. But eventually in this
landscape, if the river continues to cut
deeper and maybe make a deeper uh
canyon, as we see over here with number
three, that's going to cause the
groundwater system to track with it. So
notice the water table over here is
pretty much on par with the surface of
the river over here on the right. And so
now we have these hollow sections of the
cave up above where the water table the
groundwater no longer resides. And now
we're starting to create even more
expansive networks networks of caves at
depth below the water table. So these
hollowedout caves just filled with air
shown in black here those would be the
types of caves we would readily explore.
Those would be the caves that you might
see at your, you know, national park or
national monument. But the cave's
actually not getting any bigger in those
locations. It's expanding only in these
places that are below the water table
down here where where dissolution of
that limestone continues. And then in
our final diagram here, we can see that
the canyons cut even deeper. The water
tables dropped even further than it was
previously.
Out of the way a little bit. And now you
can see that the main thing happening in
those abandoned caves closer to the
surface is water's still seeping down
carrying dissolved mineral material, but
it's actually starting to fill in the
cave. It's actually starting to deposit
mineral material in those uh cave
systems. And simultaneously at depth
where we have the area below the water
table, that's where the cave systems are
getting larger and more expansive. So
notice that the caves track with the
surface water bodies as this landscape
develops. When the surface water bodies
are high, the water tables high and
that's where the ca that's where the the
caves are getting larger. But as the
water, excuse me, as the water in the
stream is goes lower as the canyons are
cut deeper, then the water table tracks
with that and you end up with these very
extensive cave systems sort of
vertically as well as laterally. So
that's the idea with behind cave
formations. Um let's look a little bit
at some of these depositional features.
So the first thing that happens after
these hollowedout cave systems are
formed is groundwater continues to seep
down preferentially along fractures and
other easy conduits that the water can
follow. But as it moves down through the
rock, it's dissolving out some of the
calsite out of the limestone. Once it
starts dripping off the ceiling of the
cave, it actually precipitates some
mineral material behind and it forms
initially these things called soda
straws. So these are these cylindrical
tubes. Um they're actually hollow on the
inside. So water's traveling down the
inside of the tube and then drop by drop
by drop these things get longer, but
they can eventually get plugged up. So
they're also precipitating mineral
material inside the tube or inside the
straw, if you will. Once they get
plugged up, the water starts running
along the outside of the the feature
here. And that's when it sort of evolves
from a soda straw into a stelactite,
these sort of icicleshaped um features
that protrude down from the ceiling of
the cave. You can see how nicely these
follow this fracture system here. So, we
have a preferential pathway that the
groundwater is following as it works its
way down through this limestone, through
this rock. And then of course the
classic cave features. So the the pointy
ones are and skinny ones are the
stelactites. Those drops do hit the the
floor of the cave where they can also
build up mineral material to form the
form these more rounded uh cave features
here called stelagmites. And then in
some instances you can even get the
stagmites growing upwards while the
stelactites are growing downwards and
they can actually link together to form
columns. So these are other cave
features we often see. Here's a nice
skinny one over here. Here's a nice
thick one over in this region of the
cave. Um, but fascinating features
nonetheless. And then finally to wrap up
this episode here in extensive areas
where we have a lot of the limestone
and the groundwater and surface water
are actively uh eroding or dissolving
out that limestone. We actually get an
interesting set of topographic features
that are some it's sometimes
collectively called carsted topography.
So any any environment where you have a
lot of limestone and you have sufficient
rain to for the water to be actively
dissolving away rock, you might get this
type of uh topographic setting. You
might get not just caves in the
subsurface. You might get things like
what we see here like disappearing
streams like streams that actually go
into cave systems or reappear in some
other place uh downstream. Just an
interesting uh set of features on that
landscape. You might get very irregular
uh drainage systems where it's not
draining like you typically would see
small streams draining into larger
streams. You might see stream systems
very disrupted, disappearing and then
reappearing. So a very uh intricate and
complex way in which the the subsurface
and the groundwater interacts and um is
uh set up in an interesting array with
the surface water streams that we find
up above. So that'll do it for this
episode. episode 37 just looking at a
few groundwater issues and then looking
at caves which are a really interesting
and common feature related to
groundwater in certain environments like
limestone. So, I hope you enjoyed this
episode and we'll see you next time.
Take care.