# Ep38 - How Deserts Form.txt
Video ID: bsWZZlLJoy8
Lang: en
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bsWZZlLJoy8

---

Hi there folks and welcome to the
physical geology geology 101 video
series. I'm geology professor Shawn
Willsey.
This video series is designed and
modeled exactly like my college course.
It's the same curriculum, it's the same
content, the same material, uh but here
on YouTube for you to enjoy and peruse
at your leisure, whether you're a new
learner learner of this material, uh
learning geology for the first time, or
maybe you learned years ago and you want
a little bit of a refresher. Whatever
the case may be, this is a video series
for you. And if you're enjoying this,
you can drop down to the video
description and there's ways you can
donate and support the geology education
videos that I put together. So, let's go
ahead and get right to it. This is
episode 38 and we're going to look at
how deserts form. We're going to be
looking at deserts, not desserts. That's
something very different. Uh so, we will
be not be talking about desserts today,
although just thinking about it's making
me hungry. We're going to be looking at
deserts. Basically, these areas on
planet Earth where we have more water
lost through evaporation or
evapotranspiration
than we get through precipitation. Now,
when people think of deserts, there's a
lot of images that come to mind. Might
be something like you see there on the
screen, like the desert southwest with
some, you know, like Monument Valley,
like something out of an old western. Um
might be something quite different.
Might be places where there's like a dry
lake bed. There's a variety of landforms
and processes that are dominant in the
deserts and that's what we'll look at
with the next episode. But in this
specific episode, we're going to look at
basically how deserts form and why they
exist. Um so, as an example here, where
I live in Twin Falls, Idaho, we get
about 10 in of rain per year on average.
Sometimes a little bit more, sometimes a
little bit less, but that's our our mean
annual uh precipitation amount. But our
evapotranspiration, how much water we
lose, is about 25 in per year. So, I
definitely live in a desert climate in
the desert environment and this is where
some of these processes we're going to
look at tend to dominate here. Uh
there's often very little to no
vegetation in a lot of deserts. You can
see that in the images there. Um
and usually we find that deserts
actually are pretty important and uh a
big part of the land surface on planet
Earth. It's up upwards of around 30% of
Earth's land surface is some type of
desert or arid type of region. So, it's
a very important part of the landscape
here on planet Earth. Uh and the main
forces that shape deserts tend to be
tectonics, water, which is ironic
because it they don't receive a lot of
rainfall. Yet, when they do get
rainfall, it can be have a very
pronounced and dramatic impact on the
landscape. And even the wind plays a
pretty important role in deserts, maybe
more so than any other uh climate region
on planet Earth. So, when you think
about deserts, don't just think about
hot, dry places. I showed you a picture
here of snow on these dunes here in the
Sahara. And so, snow and uh cold weather
can be a part of desert regions as well.
So, let's dig into this. Let's look
first at where we see deserts on planet
Earth. This is just a quick snapshot of
some of the known large desert regions
on planet Earth and where they exist.
So, here in North America, where I live,
I'm part of the Great Basin Desert. And
really, there's sort of sub names to
some of the deserts like the the
Colorado Desert, the Mojave Desert, the
Chihuahuan Desert, the Sonoran Desert.
This just shows some of them, but we
have a
uh pronounced desert region here in the
western and southwestern portions of
North America. Down in South America,
there's the Atacama Desert on the coast
of Chile here, uh down to the Patagonia
Desert.
Uh in Africa, we have the Sahara Desert,
maybe the most well-known uh and largest
desert on Earth, which kind of spills
over across the Red Sea to the Arabian
Desert and other parts of the Middle
East and into parts of China and
Mongolia with the with the Gobi Desert,
some of these other deserts. So,
Australia has a few deserts. In fact,
most of Australia's inland region is a
large dry area, and there's even some
deserts here in South Africa.
So, let's look at what sort of factors
govern deserts. Why do these things even
exist? What's controlling their
distribution on planet Earth? And the
number one factor, and we're going to
explore this in quite a bit of detail
here, it's going to feel a little bit
like a meteorology lesson, but it's
important to understand
how the atmosphere works in order to
figure out where the water is falling,
places that are very rainy, and also
where the water is not falling, like in
these desert regions. So, the number one
factor that controls the location of
deserts on planet Earth is latitude. In
fact, if we go back to that graphic
there, you might even see that a lot of
the Earth's major deserts do line up
along similar latitudes here north and
south of the equator. So, let's just
start with this basic idea for how the
atmosphere moves air around. So, at the
poles, of course, we know it's cold at
both the North Pole and the South Pole.
We also know that cold air sinks. So,
the air at the poles is sinking. It's
It's moving from the atmosphere down to
the surface. We also know that hot air
rises. So, at the equator, where which
has the highest temperatures
on the planet typically, this is where
we get a lot of air rising. So, we have
hot air rising in the tropics, cold air
sinking in the poles. And if you just
start with that basic premise there,
that's going to set the stage for
understanding exactly why we have
deserts in some places. So, cold air
descending at the poles, hot air rising
in the tropics along the equator. So,
the next thing to kind of put into
motion here as we kind of make this a
little bit more complicated, is now
let's take those two basic premises.
So cold air sinking at the poles, hot
air rising at the equator. Well, the the
hot air rising from the equator, it it
can't rise indefinitely. It can't escape
Earth's gravity. So this air as it rises
from the surface, it actually rises and
it cools. As it cools, it starts moving
towards the poles.
Okay, so in a simple if the Earth's
atmosphere doesn't look exactly like
this. We're going to make things a
little bit more complicated. But let's
go with this simplified model here. Hot
air rising at the at the equator, that
air then moving back towards the poles
where it sinks. And then once that air
sinks, it runs into the Earth's surface
and it starts moving
along the Earth's surface back towards
the equator where it progressively gets
warmer and then it rises again. So we
have this simple circulation model.
Basically simple convection. Basically
air hot air rising, cold air sinking at
the equator and at the poles. So that's
the first little
setup we're going to do here.
Now when that air, let me go back one
real quick here. When that air rises
at the equator, air that rises cools,
the water vapor trapped in that can form
clouds and this is where we get a lot of
the Earth's rainfall. So where this uh
where we see this air masses rising here
along the equator, this creates an area
of low pressure and this is known as the
intertropical convergence zone. So right
here along the equator, you can see that
there's quite a bit of cloud cover here.
This is where we see a lot of the clouds
and therefore a lot of the rainfall that
falls on planet Earth tends to be right
around this equatorial belt. Now this
thing moves a little bit with the
seasons. It doesn't stay fixed right at
the equator. As we go into, you know,
May, June, July, the northern hemisphere
summer, this thing migrates to the north
a little bit and then Then we move into
November, December, January, it it moves
a little bit south, um, but it but it
more or less straddles the equator,
moves a little bit north or south
depending on the seasons. And this is an
area where we have, uh, clouds and
rainfall because this is where that
warm, moist air is rising. In fact, if
you look at what the distribution of the
rainforest on the planet, so where is it
the rainiest, the wettest places on
Earth? You think of like the Amazon
basin here in Brazil, parts of Central
Africa, parts of Southeast Asia and
Indonesia. This coincides nicely with
this intertropical convergence zone.
Right along the equator, it's where the
air, warm, moist air is rising,
producing clouds, and producing high
amounts of rainfall.
So, then if we just add one more kind of
complexity to it. So, it's not as simple
as what I showed with just air moving
from the poles down to the equator,
rising, and moving back. The other
complicating factor is the Earth is
spinning. It's rotating on its axis.
This is something called the Coriolis
force or the Coriolis effect, and I'm
not going to get into the physics of
that and exactly what goes on with that
in this episode, but suffice it to say,
if you kind of look at the diagram here
and we start at the equator, you can see
this is where the air is warmest. The
air is rising. It's producing clouds as
you can see on the diagram here. That
air then moves away from the equatorial
region once it rises sufficiently that
it's cooling. And as that cool air moves
back towards the poles, right at around
30-ish degrees latitude is where it
starts to sink. And when air sinks, it
does the opposite of air rising. Air
rising cools, expands, produces clouds
and rain. Air that's sinking, um,
actually warms up as it sinking. It
inhibits any cloud formation. It
actually dries out, uh, the air, if you
will, and therefore we get essentially
no clouds and no rainfall where air is
sinking or descending from above. So,
right at around 30° latitude, instead of
having low pressure where the air is
rising, we get high pressure. High
pressure forms a lot of times when air
is sinking from above. Uh notice there's
another situation up here as we head
towards the poles
uh where
the air that is uh moving from the poles
also sinks at around 30°. Some of that
air moves back towards the poles where
it rises, uh and that creates another
low-pressure area in here. So, we get
areas where there's a lot of rainfall if
you live in, you know, the Gulf Coast
area,
uh uh the Gulf of Alaska area there, uh
you know, it's a quite wet environment,
quite a bit of precipitation falls. So,
if we look where these lows lows are,
like at the equator and at about 60°
latitude, that's where a lot of rainfall
and clouds form. And if we look at where
the high pressure is, right around 30°
latitude and also at the poles, this
tends to be places where it's quite dry
because the air is sinking or settling
from above. Um so, this really sets into
uh motion the dominant control for the
deserts. The deserts tend to be right at
around this sort of 25 or 30° latitude,
um that coincides nicely with these
deserts. The main control is this
high-pressure area where the air is
sinking from above, and it just inhibits
cloud formation and also rainfall. But,
there's other controls on deserts as
well, things that also create deserts in
other environments. And you can see on
the diagram here, there's, you know,
places well beyond that latitude where
deserts exist. So, let's explore a few
of those factors. So, another factor
that comes into play is what's known as
the rain shadow effect. So, if we have
uh pronounced topographic barrier, like
a mountain or a volcano, something like
that, and we have moist warm air coming
in, maybe off the ocean, or there's some
supply of warm moist air, as that air
rises up over that topographic barrier,
it's going to tend to drop most of its
precipitation on this side of the the
topography. This is sometimes what we
call the windward side. So, you're going
to get a lot of rainfall, a lot of snow,
perhaps, depending on the elevations and
the and the temperatures on this side of
the mountain. And then once that air
mass gets over the top of that
topographic feature and it starts to
descend, well, that's again air that's
sinking, right? Remember we talked about
air rising? So, here on this side of the
mountain, the air is lifting, it's
rising, it's expanding, uh and it's
producing clouds and precipitation. But,
where the air is descending or sinking
here on the backside or what we
sometimes call the leeward side of this
topographic feature, uh this is where
the air is actually
uh warming up as it's descending. The
molecules are actually colliding, so the
air is getting hotter and and warmer, uh
and it's going to produce more um it's
going to dry out the air considerably.
We're not going to see as much rain or
precipitation on this side of the
mountain. And this is what's called a
rain shadow. You can really see that
quite nicely if we focus on the Big
Island of Hawaii, a place that I'm quite
familiar with. This is the northern tip
of the Big Island. This is uh uh
an older volcano that's pretty well
eroded, but it's still a significant
topographic barrier called Kohala. Rises
up to about 6,000 ft or so there on the
Big Island. And the trade winds are the
dominant um weather maker
uh in the Hawaiian Islands. So, here in
the tropics, most of the weather comes
out of the northeast. So, all this warm,
moist air over the ocean, over the
Pacific comes in and it runs into the
Big Island of Hawaii and it's forced to
rise up the slopes of this big
topographic barrier Kohala. And you can
really see on this Google Earth image
just the color difference, how green it
is on this side of the volcano or the uh
mountain here and then how brown and dry
it is on this side over here. But, just
to give you uh some real data and
numbers here. So, picking one of the
rainfall stations here
on the windward side or uh on the
northeast side of Kohala, we get a mean
annual rainfall amount of about 149 in,
right around 378 cm. So, a tremendous
amount of rain falls on this side of the
island. When we go to the other side of
the island, the leeward side or the rain
shadowed side of Kohala, we get
something like 9 in. So, that's in I
mean, in these two stations here
probably only like I don't know, like 30
mi apart. It's an incredible difference
in rainfall amounts. And the rainfall,
of course, is influencing the plants and
animals that live in that community. It
really drives the ecosystem. So, a
really enhanced rain shadow effect there
on the Big Island of Hawaii uh due to
these volcanoes, due to the topography,
and the proximity to the oceans there.
Just a tremendous example of the rain
shadow effect um
and uh and it's and it's uh influence on
weather and climate. So, it's Even
though it's Hawaii, and you think of
Hawaii is like, "Oh, it's a tropical
paradise." Well, there are parts of
Hawaii that are quite literally deserts.
And there's cacti growing there, and
it's dry, and um
quite arid in places, just depending on
which part of the island you're on. And
it's incredibly uh variable from one
place to the next. Another big control
we have on deserts and what controls
their locations tends to be their
position within a continent. The further
away you are from the ocean and its
moisture sources, uh they tend to be
drier areas. So, here we have the Gobi
Desert uh and the Taklamakan Desert here
in parts of Mongolia
uh and China. And these deserts here sit
in the rain shadow of the Himalayas to
some degree, but they're also just very
isolated. They're sort of in the middle
of this part of Asia, isolated from the
the moisture sources that come off the
ocean and so they tend to be quite dry.
So this can also have
an effect on controlling where the
deserts exist. If you look at these two
deserts on a map with latitude, you'll
see that they're, you know, quite a ways
north of that 20 to 30° kind of
Goldilocks zone we talked about where
high pressure dominates. They're about
right around 40° or so, maybe a good 10
to 15° north of that high pressure
latitude. But part of their reason is
that they are quite isolated in this
continental interior location.
And then our last one here is looking at
cold ocean current. So cold water tends
to have and the cold air that that comes
with it tends to have less we use the
word capacity to hold moisture versus
warm air. Warm air is of course what
fuels hurricanes and big tropical
systems, storms. Cold air doesn't have
that amount of moisture in it and so
places that are adjacent to these cold
ocean currents tend to be quite dry as
well. And a good example here is the
Atacama Desert along the coast of South
America here in Chile. Now there's a bit
of a double whammy here because we have
the Andes Mountains which are a major
topographic barrier. The weather is
coming in from the east and so it is
rain shadowed for sure, but definitely
another effect of this that creates this
desert here is this cold ocean current
that comes up from Antarctica and goes
north along the coast of Chile.
Eventually it gets warmer as it gets
closer to the equator and then it kind
of circulates back around in this sort
of counterclockwise fashion here. But
these cold ocean currents in the Atacama
Desert are a a big big player here in
creating deserts. So there's some
secondary factors that can be at work as
well. So that's some of the reasons why
we have deserts on planet Earth, some of
the
meteorological reasons.
So, let's do a quick quiz. People like
the quizzes for these episodes. So,
here's a quiz question for you, multiple
choice.
Which of the following is the primary
reason most deserts form?
We've got A, high temperatures, B, lack
of vegetation, C, descending dry air
where high pressure exists, D, sandy
soils, or E,
the aliens stole our water. So, I'll
give you a second to consider that, or
you might want to pause the video while
you think about that question.
Okay, let's go ahead and answer the
question then. So, as we've hopefully
done a good job here in educating each
other, the main reason, the main control
over deserts, remember they can they can
have high temperatures or low
temperatures. There's plenty of cold
deserts. In fact, the polar regions can
be considered deserts because they
don't receive very much precipitation.
Um, and while some deserts have a lack
of vegetation, that's actually an
effect, right? That's not the cause of
the desert. That's an effect of having
a desert. And so, the the answer here
was C, the high pressure regions and
descending dry air, whether it's from
the rain shadow effect or from latitude
and just the way the atmosphere works.
That is the main reason why we see these
high pressure regions exist, and these
coincide pretty nicely with the deserts.
So, stay tuned for my next episode,
episode 39, where we start to explore
some of the desert processes and
landforms that are common on planet
Earth. And thanks for joining us.