# Ep39 - Desert Landforms.txt
Video ID: gUFKiX6UJD8
Lang: en
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gUFKiX6UJD8

---

Hi there, team. Geology Professor Sean
Willsey here. Time for another
installment in our Geology 101 physical
geology video series. This video series
is designed exactly after the college
course I teach. It's the same content.
It's the same curriculum. Um you can
supplement these videos with some of my
field videos to get a sense of some of
the the processes and the landforms and
the other things we've talked about in
here. Um and it's free here on YouTube.
So, this is for folks who are learning
for the first time. Maybe those who
learned this material once upon a time
and want a refresher. Anyone who wants
to learn is welcome here. So, thanks for
joining me. If you want to donate to the
cause here with the videos, there is
some links under the video description
where you can make a donation if you so
choose. Uh so, let's get right to it
here. We have uh episode 39. So, in
episode 38, we learned about how deserts
form. And sort of the reason and the
factors why we have these arid regions
on planet Earth. And what we'll do today
is look at some specific geologic
processes
uh and um environments, landforms if you
will, associated with deserts. So, we're
going to look at some erosional and
depositional landforms. Remember,
erosional refers to material being
transported. So, sediment being
transported, the the landscape being
shaped, things being removed. Uh and
depositional is where those sediments
that have been transported come to rest.
And here in desert regions, we see great
examples of both. So, you'll probably
see some nice visuals here, some photos
that look familiar. Maybe you visited
some of these types of places or
settings in your travels to national
parks, maybe here in America, maybe
somewhere else. Uh so, let's go ahead
and dive right in. So, interestingly
enough, when we talk about deserts, uh
even though these are the driest places
on Earth, the most important agent of
erosion, the most important modifier of
that desert landscape, is water, which
is kind of incredible because they just
don't get a lot of water. These are
places that might only get a few inches
or centimeters of rainfall per year, and
yet that rainfall can have a pronounced
influence on the way the landform, or
excuse me, the way the landscape looks
and sort of like how that desert
presents itself to you. So,
typically
water is going to be the most important
erosional agent. Wind, we'll talk about
wind as well. Obviously, because we're
in these very dry areas,
and we're sort of excluding the polar
deserts at at the poles, we're looking
more at the low latitude to mid latitude
deserts. So, ice and glaciers don't
really play a role here. So, it's
dominated by water and a little bit of
wind. You can see the photo here from
Death Valley National Park in 2022 when
they had a flash flooding event and just
some sort of the damage and the process
that goes on there. So, we don't have a
lot of vegetation or soil in these
deserts. So, when we do get these heavy
rainfall events, they can be quite
intense. We can get heavy thunderstorms,
and that can produce flash floods. So,
we get these very steep canyons
funneling the water and creating these
important and very,
you know,
dramatic flash floods on this landscape.
So, water is going to be the most
important thing. We'll get to wind in a
little bit here. We do have some
instances where we can get surface
water, but those are pretty rare. Don't
really see, for the most part, in a lot
of deserts like perennial streams that
flow through that landscape
constantly over time. It tends to be
more ephemeral type of streams and these
very rare but intense flood events that
really modify the landscape. So, we're
going to look at a couple landforms
associated with water in the deserts.
And the first one here we're going to
look at is in alluvial fan. So, we have
a canyon here
and the water, when we get a heavy
rainfall event, it's going to be
funneled down into this narrow canyon.
It has a steep gradient, so you can
imagine that water is moving with quite
a bit of energy and velocity. It's
picking up sediment, maybe sand, maybe
gravel, maybe boulders, depending on all
the uh variables there. And then, once
it reaches the valley floor, it's going
to slow down, spread out, and deposit
all that material, all that debris, uh
into a fan-shaped deposit here. So, it
might take this path at one point. It
might take this path uh during a
different flood. But, over time, the
distribution of sediment across this
surface is going to create this
fan-shaped deposit. Very similar to a
delta with a river, but here it's not
going into a body of water. It's just
dumping that material out onto the
valley floor. So, some photos here, some
great photos uh showing you what these
alluvial fans look like. So, you can see
this steep canyon here. And then, as we
approach the flat valley floor, you can
see this perfect textbook little uh
fan-shaped deposit here right at the
base of it. Little the road here kind of
going or skirting around the alluvial
fan gives you a little bit of context
and sense of scale. So, we've got a nice
one here. And then, if you look kind of
around the corner here, you can see
another set of these alluvial fans along
the range front. Another one over here
as well. Um this is what the alluvial
fan surfaces might look like if you were
down at sort of ground level looking up
towards the mountains. You can see that
they are a poorly sorted mixture of
gravel and sand. Uh and you can really
just even see some of these little
gullies in here. things flood, you can
sort of see the landscape and the actual
little drainage drainages that the water
takes uh on the alluvial fan. Here's a
nice photo of an alluvial fan in
cross-section. So, this really shows us,
I guess, three distinct surfaces and
their gradient. So, we have this very
steep gradient here along the mountain
front. Of course, the canyon is not
quite as steep as the the you know this
hillside here, but it it's still quite
steep. So, we have the mountains
themselves, which are quite steep. We
have the valley floor, which is
essentially horizontal. So, it's
essentially has a gradient of zero.
Um so, we can imagine water coming down
through these mountains having quite a
bit of energy and velocity able to move
sediment. But then when it enters this
flat valley floor, which has no gradient
and therefore essentially no energy or
very little energy, uh we get this sort
of intermediate feature in here, which
is the alluvial fan. So, you can see
this different uh slope feature here
that defines the alluvial fan.
When we get a couple of these alluvial
fans coming out of adjacent canyons, as
these alluvial fans evolve and grow in
size continuing to uh deposit sediment
at the foot of the mountain, they can
grow. Uh they build up over time and
they can actually start to merge. And
once we get these alluvial fans merging
into one large uh sedimentary
depositional surface, uh sort of um
uh branching out or sort of sweeping out
from the mountain front here. These are
what are known as bajadas. So, you can
see this big uh
alluvial surface here. Distinct canyons
still, but they've actually merged
together. These two uh depositional
features have actually merged together
to form one larger depositional feature.
So, these are what we call uh bajadas.
Uh great view here, sort of aerial view
top-down from on Google Earth looking at
Death Valley. You can see the flat
bottom floor here. We'll talk more about
this feature here in a second. Over here
on the right, you can see a number of
these distinct but fairly small alluvial
fans. This one's maybe the biggest one
over here coming out of these steep
mountains. Um and then over here on the
left side, which would be to the west,
you can see there's another set of
mountains. Uh but these fans actually
have a larger um
depositional uh product. You can see
that these alluvial fans have actually
merged into one somewhat continuous
depositional landform. So, this is a
bajada here on the west side of uh
Badwater Basin here in in Death Valley.
And over here, the steeper mountain
front, which has these very small
limited drainage basins, has produced
these very small uh separate alluvial
fans. But perhaps over time, given more
erosion and more deposition, these will
start to merge together. They will
advance across the valley floor, and you
could get a bajada over here. Uh but
this one right now is is the larger uh
depositional feature because these
drainages actually have much larger
catchment areas, have a bigger basin,
and so they consequently carry a lot
more water and sediment down to the
valley floor.
Um so, yeah, some of the flash flood
damage in Death Valley, I mean,
periodically, it feels like every
you know, once every 10 to 20 or so
years, they have a significant flooding
event there. Um and that can cause
damage to the roadways. You can see
damage here to one of the park's
roadways. Some of the roadways follow
these drainages, uh these channels here.
And so, when you get all that flood
water moving through here, it just sort
of uh erodes the road and the cement or
the asphalt, and sort of causes some of
that damage there.
Um eventually, what we can have is as
the sediment is transported away from
the mountains down towards the valley,
that build-up of sediment can actually
start to bury uh the existing topography
and leave these little isolated remnants
of mountains sort of sticking out um in
from the bajada. So, here's our big
alluvial uh
well, what was an alluvial fan, now a
bajada, this alluvial depositional
surface here. But you can see these
steeper uh rock um rocky outcrops along
the valley floor. And these are what are
called inselbergs. It's a German word. I
believe it's island mountain is what it
translates to. Uh, and so these are
features are called inselbergs. So, it's
actually an interesting process where
the mountain supplied the sediment that
gets carried down uh, into the valley.
But, as more and more sediment gets
deposited, that same sediment that came
from the mountains is what eventually
can completely uh, bury the mountains
and completely cover them uh, over time.
So, these are some inselbergs sticking
up part of a larger mountain front. You
can And you can see some connections
here, right? These dark rocks here
probably match up to these dark rocks
over here. But, we've had so much
sediment build up in this area uh, that
it's covered any topography that was
there.
So, the other thing we have in these
types of regions is we have these very
flat desert floors. These are sometimes
uh, lake beds. Often times they are.
They're places where um, the sediment
accumulates. And because a lot of these
desert environments have no drainages
out to the oceans, the water just kind
of ponds there. And the very fine
suspended material in that water is what
gets deposited. So, example here of the
Bonneville Salt Flats uh, down in
northern Utah. Here's one in
southeastern Oregon. So, you can see the
the mountains over here on the right.
But, then this flat-bottomed
um,
this flat level
uh, horizontal
lake surface. And these can collect
water at times. When you have
exceptionally high rainfall events, you
can get, you know, maybe a few inches,
centimeters, maybe a foot or more of
water out on these things. But, because
you're in this very dry arid climate,
uh, that water evaporates and you're
left with this sort of crusted surface
here. Uh, but these are also
depositional environment features. You
see these down in the Andes, uh, east of
the Andes, uh, places where there's just
locally no drainage out to uh, the ocean
or some other river system. Uh these can
also, as we talked about, can accumulate
lots of lots of salt. So, a lot of
evaporite minerals, gypsum, salt, other
types of things can be formed on these
surfaces. Uh they develop these big
polygonal cracks as the water
evaporates and the material actually
contracts
as it dries. Sometimes you get mud
cracks, so these sort of polygon mud
cracks if it's more mud-rich material
here. Uh and so these again surfaces are
called playas. We've got these playas
and alluvial fans often times forming
together in some desert environment. So,
let's take a look at what the wind does
in deserts. Water is our our typically
our most uh important and significant
erosional um
uh product, but wind is important in
some desert regions as well. Uh wind
typically gets, in my opinion, way too
much credit for the things we see. A lot
of times people see, you know, like the
arches of National Park and I've had
lots of people think that that's caused
by the wind or some maybe hoodoo with a
kind of balanced rock on top, and they
think the wind produces a lot of these
things. But remember that the wind uh
has limited energy. Uh the wind
typically only picks up at its largest
size sand-size particles. So, it's not
picking up anything bigger than sand,
and usually the wind is only a modifier
of the landscape at very low levels,
very close to the ground. And so, here's
a diagram that kind of shows that.
Here's some scale over here. 4 in, maybe
10 cm. Here's the wind moving from left
to right, and in this case we've got um
the wind acting on particles on the
surface. And if they're larger
particles, like sand-size particles,
they might slide across the surface.
They might kind of bounce. Um maybe they
slide along, hit another grain of sand,
and that causes them to get pushed up,
and so they they fly through the air,
but they're staying very low to the
ground. They're not actually what we
would call like in suspension with the
wind. They're not actually, you know,
several meters or feet above the ground
level. What is significantly above
ground level is the finer size material,
the the silts, the clays, what we could
call the mud size particles, and that's
what's carried as the suspended load.
So, that material is fine enough that it
can be picked up from the surface and
carried higher
the in the air
above the surface. So, this is how we
might get like a dust storm or even like
a dust devil if you think like a little
rotating column of air out in the
desert. So, the sand's moving close to
the surface, the finer grain material
can be carried higher. We might get a
big
sort of dust storm. These are called
haboobs. These are usually created by
intense thunderstorms. There's lots of
descending air in some of these
thunderstorms. That descending air
moving at high speeds hits the ground
and moves out and picks up any loose
fine grain material on the ground and
can create these big sort of dust storms
that we know are typical in some of
these desert regions.
One of the other cool things that we see
caused by the wind in these desert
regions. So, remember the wind's at the
surface, it's picking up and moving,
transporting these loose fine grained
particles of sediment, and we call that
process deflation. So, basically, you
know, if you have a surface with a lot
of different sizes of sediment and the
wind is a strong player in that setting,
what you're going to end up with is the
wind moving and transporting away from
that location the fine grained sediment.
And as it progressively does so, it
leaves behind the larger sediment. So,
that maybe the coarse sands and gravels
get left behind cuz they're too big and
heavy to be carried by the wind. Over
time, what we end up with is a surface
that is depleted in those fine grain
materials. It's completely an
interlocking arrangement of these large
particles. Uh there's still fine-grained
material below, but it's sort of mantled
or covered, protected if you will, by
this uh surface of these larger
particles. And this is known as desert
pavement. Here's a good example of what
this might look like in desert region.
So, sometimes when you're out just on a
hike in some of these desert regions,
look down at your feet, you see this
kind of loose uh gravelly surface, kind
of interlocking, almost like a mosaic,
and it just lacks any of this
fine-grained material. And yet, if you
were to just pick up a couple of these
rocks or pebbles, scrape off this layer
a little bit, you'd get down and see
that there is that fine-grained
material, but it's just beneath it. So,
this is what's known as desert pavement.
Usually, it's an indication that that
surface has been stable geologically for
some time. If this You're not going to
see these in active uh arroyos or washes
because there's going to be periodic
floods and things that come through that
move the particles around. So, this is
typically only on like the benches,
places that are protected from heavy
runoff and uh water, and where just the
wind is the primary player in the
erosion that goes on there. So, a nice
example there of some desert pavement.
The other thing we see in these types of
environments is uh as the wind moves the
sand, remember it's close to the ground.
If there's a larger rock sitting out on
the landscape, uh that sand being
transported by the wind is basically
going to sandblast that particle. And
over times, all those collisions,
usually it's a little grain of quartz or
something like that, some hard material,
hitting that boulder, um over time,
that's going to end up with a like a
surface, sort of a a planar or faceted
surface on one side. So, it actually
modifies the shape of the particle. Uh
and then maybe that particle is caused
to tip or move. Maybe the wind changes
direction potentially, and then you
might start having the sand blasting
acting on a different surface of that
rock, and then you end up with these
kind of faces here. So, you can see that
in the last diagram here in D. You also
can see this nice example here of
polished surfaces. In this case, we have
two sort of uh faceted sides. Sometimes
it's more than two. It could be three or
more. Uh a lot of times it'll show
striations showing the direction that
the wind and the particles the wind was
carrying was moving across the surface
of this rock. And these are what are
known as ventifacts. So, these uh wind
eroded
rocks that sort of sit on the landscape.
They haven't been moved at all or or
very little, uh but they've been
constantly modified and shaped by the
wind erosion and the sand that the wind
is carrying.
Um of course, the primary feature of
wind in desert regions are dunes. That's
probably the first thing you think
about. Um and we talked a little bit
about these when we talked about
sedimentary rocks and and cross-bedding,
I believe. But, the way a sand dune
works is this the wind, in this case, is
moving from left to right. All the
little sand grains are just sort of
skipping, rolling, staying close to the
surface, but working their way up
towards the crest of the dune. Any finer
grain material that's on this landscape
would get blown away and downstream some
distance. It's just the sand that's left
behind. And then, once the sand gets to
just beyond the crest or just on the
what we call the slip face or the
leeward side here, it's protected from
the wind, but it starts to accumulate.
And once it starts to accumulate, it
steepens the slope, and then
periodically, we can get little
avalanches of sand down the slip face.
And what that does over time is it
maintains this angle, what we call the
angle of repose. So, the the backside of
a dune is typically right around 34. I
think I put here like 30 to 35, but that
angle is maintained uh because that's
the steepest angle you can get that dry
loose sand accumulating before it
actually starts to slide and fail. Uh
and then over time the whole dune moves
and migrates downwind. So, in the second
diagram here, you can see the the dotted
line showing you where the dune was sort
of at this in this first diagram, and
then where the dune has moved. So, the
the whole dune as a uh feature here has
migrated or moved in the downwind
direction. All these little lines in
here that look like zebra stripes are
about the little avalanches of sand in
sedimentary rocks and in sandstones,
this is what we call cross-bedding. So,
it's a good indicator
or it's one it's possibly an indicator
that it was a sand dune deposit at that
time. We get cross-beds in in stream
deposits as well, but the uh the wind
produced cross-beds tend to be quite a
bit steeper and have a few other
characteristics to them. So, this is
sort of how a sand dune works in a
wind-dominated environment. Of course,
for a sand dune to exist, you obviously
need wind. We also need a source of the
sand. You actually need to have dry
loose sand that's being eroded out onto
the landscape. So, you have to have a
supply of sand in order to get sand
dunes uh to form. Couple different types
of dunes, there's actually
several. There's probably
half a dozen to a dozen different types
of dunes. I'm just going to give you a
few examples here. These sort of uh
crescent-shaped dunes here are called
barchan dunes. Uh the tips or the horns
of these features for point downwind.
So, in this case, the the uh
wind is moving from this water body, the
ocean here. I think this is in Namibia.
I should have got a location here. And
it's moving towards the bottom of the
photo. So, you can see these individual
and sometimes they've merged together,
but these are the barchan dunes.
Usually, there's not a lot of wind that
forms these, and these typically form
from wind that consistently blows in one
direction as you as you tend to see in
these coastal regions. And so, here's
another little example here. Wind in
this case with the diagram moving left
to right at the crest of the dune or at
the apex of this crescent shape here,
you're likely to have the sand dune be
taller. And then as you come down to
these horns, it's going to be a little
bit smaller here. So, these are called
barchan dunes. Another one we see is
transverse dunes where you have this
sort of
sometimes they're more linear. This one
kind of has these sort of cuspate shape
to it here. But the wind is moving in
one specific direction and it's sort of
forming it think of them like big ripple
marks, you know, like the the ripples
you see on the beach, but they're on a
much larger scale and with larger
spacing between them. But the the dunes
here are forming perpendicular to the
wind direction that's blowing across
that region. So, transverse dunes
and then one that's kind of cool that
some people think is really interesting.
They're a little bit more rare are the
star dunes. So, this is the dune that
has several ridges. Sometimes it's three
or more that from its sort of central
crest area. And these form when we have
multiple wind directions. So, typically
you can actually see there's a fourth
one here. There's one, two, three, four
ridges kind of coming off this thing. A
little bit more complicated
and there's lots of variables with this
one, but the the simple way to think
about these is you've got wind blowing
in different directions pushing the dune
and making a ridge and then it might
shift and blow in a different direction,
make another ridge and then eventually
these things can all combine and form
and these the shape of these things can
vary quite a bit as well over time. So,
these star dunes might look a little bit
different as they evolve in a given
desert landscape. So, just some fun
features associated with desert regions
in terms of just landforms and a little
bit about the processes that define
those landforms. But let's wrap this up
with a fun quiz question. So, I've got a
fun quiz question here. Which of the
following desert landforms would be most
I should say likely, sorry about the
typo there, most likely to form at the
mouth of a canyon. I'll have to fix
that. Um which one of these would be
most likely to form at the mouth of a
canyon? If you want to take a minute to
think about it, you might want to pause
the video right now.
And assuming you've come back as we look
at these different ones here, so we have
the mouth of a canyon, uh we would have
water moving down through that canyon
during just heavy rainfall events,
picking up the sediment, flushing it out
to the basin or the valley floor at the
mouth of the canyon, and that would
create an alluvial fan. So our answer
there was D. So I hope you enjoyed this
episode in the Geology 101 series. Um
appreciate your support of the channel.
Hope you're enjoying learning with me,
and we'll see you next time, friends.
Take care.